https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/08/world/africa/george-bush-africa-epidemics-pepfar.html
Bush Steps Back Into Spotlight to Help Africa Fight Epidemics - The New York Times
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome,Cervical Cancer,President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief,Bush  George W,Botswana,Namibia,Africa
April 8, 2017
8759
WINDHOEK, Namibia — In a bleak hospital waiting room, a half-dozen women infected with H.I.V. described how they were able to deliver healthy babies because of drugs purchased with money from the United States.One of the mothers wanted to know if she could continue to rely on American compassion, a question that one visitor, former President George W. Bush, was eager to answer.“One reason we’ve come is because we want the people in our country to understand how effective this program is,” Mr. Bush replied through a translator. “Eleven million people now live who wouldn’t have.”As Congress heads for a bruising showdown over funding this month, Mr. Bush was in Africa this past week to publicize a $6.8 billion assistance program that has done much to save this continent’s future and more than a little to rehabilitate his image.In visits to clinics and schools in Botswana and Namibia, Mr. Bush argued that the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, or Pepfar, which he established in 2004, should not only continue to fight the AIDS crisis in Africa but also expand to tackle the deadly and preventable epidemic of cervical cancer.“It’s in our national interest to help these governments,” he said.President Trump’s budget, released last month, promised to preserve Pepfar, but proposed such deep overall reductions in foreign aid that many of the program’s defenders fear for its future, particularly under an administration that has advocated an explicitly transactional approach to international affairs.For Mr. Bush, a threat to Pepfar imperils not only a population the size of Ohio’s, but also the best part of his legacy.“What President Bush did in saving millions of lives in Africa is one of the greatest accomplishments of any American president ever,” said James K. Glassman, the former executive director of the George W. Bush Institute. “And, in my opinion, it outweighs what many see as his deficiencies in Iraq and with the economy.”Mr. Bush has largely kept out of the public eye since his administration ended in an economic meltdown with his approval ratings near record lows. But he has recently edged back onto the public stage, campaigning in 2015 and early 2016 for his brother Jeb Bush’s unsuccessful presidential bid and doing a round of interviews in recent weeks to promote a book of his paintings.But even with a new book to market, Mr. Bush has stayed away from reporters. Other than in his own books, he has avoided discussing decisions he made as president, and he has never publicly expressed doubts about his decision to invade Iraq.During his visit to Africa, Mr. Bush was a disease prevention advocate — a path worn smooth by movie and sports stars who agree to talk about themselves with the understanding that the resulting stories will mention the malady they have chosen to fight. But Mr. Bush and his wife, Laura, kept their distance; no news conferences or interviews were allowed. Aides were at pains to keep press contingents small, often shooing them away from the Bushes after brief photograph opportunities and remarks.But the former president was relaxed and self-effacing. Touring Windhoek Central State Hospital, he picked up a baby, but when the infant started coughing, he rolled his eyes and said, “Oh, no,” and then quickly gave the child back to the mother.Pictures of Mr. Bush in newspapers here show him shaking hands with President Hage G. Geingob of Namibia, who was doubled over in laughter. Mr. Bush’s quick jokes, frequent hugs and obvious delight among children charmed his hosts.Some former presidents, particularly those who leave office deeply unpopular (Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard M. Nixon come to mind), spend their remaining years in tortured pursuits for redemption. Mr. Bush shows no sign of following that path. And while Mr. Bush is devoted to charity, former President Jimmy Carter’s exhaustive efforts are no model, either. Mr. Bush made no apology for bracketing his three days of advocacy with a safari in the Okavango Delta in Botswana at the beginning and a visit to Namibia’s famed coastline at the end.Mr. Bush flew to Botswana on his friend Harlan Crow’s spacious jet. His first stop in Gaborone, the capital, was the Tlokweng Clinic, where a small encampment of cervical cancer advocates had set up colorful tents. Wearing a gray suit, blue tie and starched white shirt in 83-degree heat, Mr. Bush marched through the tents shaking hands and stopped before the press pool to give a brief speech, with his wife by his side.“I hope our government, when they analyze what works around the world, will understand that Pepfar has saved over 11 million lives,” Mr. Bush said, in remarks he would repeat again and again. “And that while progress has been made, we’ve got to continue to stay in this battle in order to save lives.”Cervical cancer is caused by strains of human papillomavirus, known as HPV, and women with H.I.V. are at a higher risk for the cancer. In the industrialized world, routine Pap smears and other tests have almost entirely eliminated deaths, but in Africa the disease remains among the most deadly. Pepfar spends billions of dollars treating women with H.I.V., only to see them die from cervical cancer, which costs a fraction as much to prevent.The cure, if administered early and regularly, is as simple as a routine vaginal vinegar wash followed by the use of a tool akin to a soldering iron to burn away exposed lesions. Vaccines given to young women before they become sexually active are effective prevention.Botswana now vaccinates every fifth-grade girl in a campaign that costs the government millions, and Pepfar spends about $3 million annually in the country to increase cervical “see-and-treat” screenings. But thousands more women could be saved with a few million dollars more in donations. Namibia’s effort has only just begun.To encourage more vaccinations, the Bushes visited schools in Botswana and Namibia, where Mrs. Bush also made library donations. When they arrived at Ella du Plessis School here, they were serenaded by students performing a rendition of a song from “The Lion King.”The visit was in many ways a return to the themes of Mr. Bush’s first presidential campaign, during which he advocated a “compassionate conservatism.”“We should believe that every life matters and every soul is precious,” Mr. Bush said at a reception at the American Embassy in Botswana, where he supported better health care for Africans.Will his work here change the minds of his presidency’s critics?“No,” said Elaine C. Kamarck, a presidential scholar at the Brookings Institution who once worked for Al Gore, Mr. Bush’s opponent in the 2000 election. Citing the disastrous consequences of the Iraq war and economic crisis, she said, “Nothing he can do now will reverse the damage of his presidency.”But the historian Doris Kearns Goodwin was more forgiving, saying attitudes about presidents shift over time. “President Bush has approached his postpresidency with dignity,” she wrote in an email, “and the fact that he’s continuing progress on curbing H.I.V./AIDS, malaria and cancer in Africa will be a chapter that historians will honor.”