https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/07/sports/tennis/wimbledon-roger-federer-marin-cilic-andy-murrary-jo-wilfried-tsonga.html
Roger Federer and Andy Murray Need Five Sets to Reach Wimbledon Semifinals - The New York Times
Tennis,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Cilic  Marin,Federer  Roger,Murray  Andy (1987- ),Tsonga  Jo-Wilfried
July 6, 2016
1414
WIMBLEDON, England — For fans in Centre Court at Wimbledon on Wednesday, it was ecstasy followed by agony.Around 4 p.m., the crowd was on its feet, roaring as Roger Federer won an electrifying tiebreaker to force a fifth set after trailing Marin Cilic by two sets to none in their quarterfinal match.About four hours later, the atmosphere was far more tense as Andy Murray tossed his racket and glumly walked to his chair to prepare for a fifth set after blowing his two-sets-to-none lead over Jo-Wilfried Tsonga.But after more than seven hours of roller-coaster tennis, the Centre Court crowd could breathe easy with Federer and Murray, Wimbledon’s favorite sons, safely in the semifinals.Federer conjured a vintage performance, rallying to win, 6-7 (4), 4-6, 6-3, 7-6 (9), 6-3. He set the record for Grand Slam singles victories with his 307th and tied Jimmy Connors for most Wimbledon wins (84).The second-seeded Murray prevailed, 7-6 (10), 6-1, 3-6, 4-6, 6-1, and will play No. 10 Tomas Berdych in Friday’s semifinals. Federer, the No. 3 seed, will face sixth-seeded Milos Raonic.“The crowd were unbelievable today,” Murray said. “They got two pretty good matches, as well, I think.”The last time Cilic and Federer played was in the 2014 United States Open semifinals. Cilic blew Federer off the court that September day, winning in straight sets and going on to claim his first major championship.For the first two sets on Centre Court, Cilic was once again bombarding Federer, hitting 12 aces among his 23 winners and losing only five points on his first serve.At 3-3 in the third set, it seemed all but over for Federer. He was down, 0-40, facing three break points. He saved them all, then broke Cilic in the next game when Cilic double-faulted.Suddenly, Federer was serving for the set, an opportunity he did not waste. He started the game with an ace and ended it with a backhand winner.Federer lived dangerously in the fourth set. Cilic had two break points at 1-2 and faced a second serve on each, but did not get either return in play. Those were the shots, Cilic said, he regretted the most.Federer saved match points when serving at 4-5 and at 5-6.“I remember just being in trouble the whole time,” Federer said. “At one point, you’re used to it. It’s not like, ‘Oh, my God, all of a sudden there’s a match point, all of a sudden there’s a break point to save.’ It just was continuous.”That best described the dramatic fourth-set tiebreaker. With Cilic serving at 3-4, Federer challenged a return that was called long. The video review found it to be in by a sliver, giving Federer a 5-3 lead and two serves on his racket.He gained two set points at 6-4 and blew the first with a tight forehand that went long. Cilic hit an ace to save the second. Cilic got a third match point at 7-6, and again faced a second serve from Federer. But he dumped the return into the net. Federer needed three more set points to put it away.By the fifth set, Federer’s serve was in a groove. He did not face a break point in the fifth, hit seven aces and won 84 percent of his first-serve points.Cilic saved one break point at 2-3, but Federer gained two more at 3-4 with forehand winners, converting the second to serve for the match. And with his 26th and 27th aces, he completed the comeback.“When you’re down two sets to love, three-all, love-40, it’s a moment when it’s not in your control anymore,” Federer said. “But I fought, I tried, I believed.”Murray and Tsonga played an exhilarating tiebreaker of their own in the first set, with two aces and 10 winners across 22 points, including a 20-shot rally that Tsonga won with a backhand volley winner.Murray seemed to seize control in a second-set rout, but Tsonga raised his level, collecting nine aces among 29 winners in the third and fourth sets. To force a fifth set, Tsonga saved three break points a 3-4, and broke Murray in the next game with back-to-back winners down the line.“He came up with some really good stuff when he needed it,” Murray said.Murray saved a break point in the first game of the fifth set, and after the crucial hold, he walked off the court for the changeover, waving a finger at his box and appearing to say, “No way I’m losing this match.”He rolled from there, losing only two points on his serve the rest of the match and breaking Tsonga twice.“The finish line was far tonight,” Tsonga said. “I came back strong on the third and fourth, but I didn’t play well in the fifth.”Murray has won his last six five-set matches and has a 23-7 record in his career in five-setters.“Physically, you’re strong, that helps for sure,” Murray said. “But mentally, you know, today was a tough match. It would have been easy to have gotten very down on myself in that fifth set after the way the fourth set ended. I was happy with that.”In the fourth round, Raonic had his own five-set adventure, coming back from two sets down to defeat David Goffin. But he considered his 6-4, 7-5, 5-7, 6-4 quarterfinal victory over Sam Querrey his best match of the tournament.Raonic’s serve hit 140 miles per hour, and he won 87 percent of his first-serve points, facing only two break points in the match. In a nod to the influence of John McEnroe, who joined Raonic’s team as a coach a few weeks ago, Raonic also served and volleyed 42 times, winning 33 of those points.A 25-year-old Canadian, Raonic is seeking his first Grand Slam final. He said his “simple goal” for this tournament was to win it.Friday’s semifinal will be a rematch of a 2014 semifinal here, which Federer won, 6-4, 6-4, 6-4. Raonic also reached the semifinals of the Australian Open this year, losing to Murray in five sets.“I think I’m definitely a step further along,” Raonic said. “I think my attitude, my mental prowess on court has definitely improved. Hopefully that makes a difference.”Murray’s semifinal opponent, Tomas Berdych, has also been left unfulfilled at the Grand Slam level. He advanced to his sixth major semifinal, defeating Lucas Pouille, 7-6 (4), 6-3, 6-2, but he has only played one Grand Slam final, at Wimbledon in 2010.That year Berdych beat Federer and Novak Djokovic before losing to Rafael Nadal in the final.“That was the first time which I show myself that I can play well for two weeks,” Berdych, 30, said. “I can beat the best guys not only at the beginning of the tournament, but also in the later stages. That’s just the few things that I’m going to try to focus on.”As much as anyone, Murray has thwarted Berdych’s hopes, beating him in the semifinals at the 2012 United States Open and the 2015 Australian Open.“In the end of the day, the most important thing is that you can stand and say, ‘O.K., I’ve tried everything that I possibly can,’” Berdych said of his Grand Slam quest.