https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/15/upshot/how-trump-could-win-and-why-he-probably-wont.html
How Donald Trump Could Win, and Why He Probably Won’t - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Republican Party,Primaries and Caucuses
Dec. 15, 2015
6562
Despite controversy after controversy, Donald Trump still dominates the polls. With his seemingly impervious lead, it is tempting to declare that he is a clear front-runner for the nomination.He has, after all, defied all expectations of his impending demise, including an early one from this author. If he has survived everything so far, why should he lose now?Mr. Trump has emerged as a true factional candidate — much more like Howard Dean or Pat Buchanan than Herman Cain, or other candidates who have surged to the top of the polls only to collapse.But it’s still too soon to say Mr. Trump is the front-runner for the nomination. He has a high floor but a low ceiling, and although he has weathered many controversies, the toughest days are yet to come.The polls already show initial signs of those challenges, like Ted Cruz’s lead in Iowa; the number of Republicans who say they would not support him; his weakness in polls of verified voters; and his smaller or nonexistent leads in one-on-one matchups against likely rivals.His chances of winning — which are real, even if not good — depend much more on the weaknesses of his opponents than his own strengths. The good news for Mr. Trump is that the opposition is flawed enough to entertain such an outcome.The notion that Mr. Trump should be considered a strong front-runner based on current polls is understandable, but inconsistent with recent history. In nearly every election cycle, there are candidates who lead national polls and sometimes even win states, but don’t come close to winning the nomination.The polls at this volatile stage can be particularly misleading. Just consider where we were four years ago, when the race was transitioning from the Cain surge to the Newt Gingrich surge. Or four years before that, when neither John McCain nor Barack Obama led nationally or in any early state. At this point in 2004, Mr. Dean led in Iowa, New Hampshire and in national polls. He took a distant third place in Iowa — and that was before his famous scream. Ultimately, he won only his home state, Vermont.Mr. Trump shares a lot in common with strong factional candidates who have ultimately fallen short in recent cycles: He does not have broad appeal throughout the party; he is unacceptable to the party’s establishment; and there are reasons to believe that his high numbers may be driven by unsustainable factors — like voters who are less likely to turn out or who are responding to pollsters with “Trump” because they haven’t heard any other name for four months.Some recent comparisons can tell us a lot about the ways that seemingly strong candidates can go on to lose. Mr. Trump could follow in the footsteps of Mr. Dean, who faltered over the final 45 days of the primary process, as voters questioned his temperament and electability.Mr. Trump will face similar questions, and there are additional questions about the solidity of his support. He tends to do worse in opinion surveys that use people from the voter registration file; the file allows pollsters to narrow their sample to past primary voters. And his dominance of media coverage may be harder to sustain once the field narrows, or actual voting results roll in. (On Monday, he was subject to rare criticism from conservative radio hosts.)Then there is the path of Mitt Romney, who led in both Iowa and New Hampshire at this point eight years ago. He didn’t collapse, but nonetheless lost both early states. Two candidates who fit the states well — Mike Huckabee and Mr. McCain — took the lead. Something similar may be happening in Iowa, where Mr. Cruz has taken a lead in recent polls. The same thing could ultimately happen in New Hampshire, where a total of nearly 40 percent of voters support one of five establishment candidates.Of course, Mr. Trump could defy all of this: His opponents could sputter, and his supporters could turn out. But then he would have to overcome the Pat Buchanan scenario. In 1996, Mr. Buchanan won the New Hampshire primary, defeating a strong front-runner, Bob Dole.But Mr. Buchanan did not win another primary. The field thinned, as other establishment-friendly candidates like Lamar Alexander faded or left the race. Mr. Buchanan’s appeal was too narrow.Here’s why that comparison might be apt. Although Mr. Trump undoubtedly has a strong base, many polls show that nearly as many Republican voters say they will definitely not vote for him as those that say they will. And he is benefiting from a weak, fractured opposition.Polls pitting Mr. Trump against Mr. Cruz or Marco Rubio in a one-on-one matchup have shown a far tighter race than is reflected in the 14-way national surveys. A recent YouGov poll, for instance, showed Mr. Trump at 34 percent in the 14-way race — a better result for him than in most polls — but in essentially a dead heat (51 to 49 percent, either way) in a one-on-one matchup against Mr. Cruz or Mr. Rubio.It would be tough for Mr. Trump to prevail in a one-on-one contest against a typical mainstream Republican, much in the same way that Mr. Buchanan quickly faltered against Mr. Dole.The catch, though, is that there is no Bob Dole in this race.There has not been a year when the mainstream candidates have been so weak while factional candidates have been so strong. Perhaps the closest example is the 2004 Democratic primary, but Mr. Dean — a governor who even managed to win the endorsement of Al Gore — was much more acceptable to his party than Mr. Trump and even Mr. Cruz are to theirs. To some extent, this is just a matter of chance: Donald Trumps don’t come around every four years. But it is also a reflection of a Republican Party that is too divided to act in the way that parties usually behave.The mainstream candidates might not stay this weak forever. Mr. Trump will not be accepted by the party’s establishment, and he will remain unacceptable to a large number of its well-educated voters. This gives the party time to coalesce behind a candidate, like Mr. Rubio. The primary calendar is structured in a way that makes it easier for the party to take its time, too, because relatively moderate blue states come later in the season. The longer it takes for the establishment to elevate a strong candidate, though, the greater the odds that no candidate earns a majority of delegates before the convention.Ultimately, the longer the rest of the party remains as weak and fractured as it is, the easier it is to imagine how a candidate with a high floor and a low ceiling, like Mr. Trump or Mr. Cruz, could thread the needle to the nomination.