http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/19/world/asia/afghan-panel-sets-election-date-drawing-government-criticism.html
Afghan Panel Sets Election Date, Drawing Government Criticism - The New York Times
Afghanistan,Elections,Ghani  Ashraf,Independent Election Commission (Afghanistan),Abdullah  Abdullah
Jan. 18, 2016
5859
KABUL, Afghanistan —  The Afghan election commission said Monday that it had set an Oct. 15 date for long-delayed parliamentary and district council elections. But the announcement immediately raised fears of new political deadlock after the country’s power-sharing government denounced the plan as illegitimate.In announcing the date, Ahmad Yousuf Nuristani, the chief of Afghanistan’s Independent Election Commission, evidently did not coordinate with the government. And a spokesman for Abdullah Abdullah, the government’s chief executive, criticized the scheduling because the electoral reform he had demanded had not gone through.“The current election commission has no legitimacy because it was their weak management of the previous election that brought us on the brink of chaos,” said Javid Faisal, a spokesman for Mr. Abdullah. “Reforming the election process is a precondition to any election, and a part of the larger reform is the changing of current commission officials.”A spokesman for President Ashraf Ghani could not be reached for comment, but Mr. Faisal insisted that he was speaking for the whole government, not just for Mr. Abdullah.The Afghan unity government, brokered by the United States after the bitter election dispute between Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah in 2014 threatened to tear the country apart, is in a race against time to meet the requirements of the political agreement it was founded on, set to expire in October.That agreement requires the government to hold local elections, which are already months overdue, by the time it completes two years in office in October. It is also supposed to have convened a grand assembly of elders from across the country by October to amend the Constitution and create the position of prime minister for Mr. Abdullah to move into.Pressure from political opposition groups has been increasing on Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah in recent months. Some of the groups have warned that the government, severely pressed by Taliban offensives across the country, will lose its legitimacy if it does not hold the elections soon. Other groups have given up on the current government entirely, calling for early presidential elections to bring in a new administration.Reforming the electoral process was at the core of the political agreement that brought Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah together. Mr. Abdullah has insisted that this is one area he will not compromise on, and his aides have said the existing election commission needs to go before any vote is held. The entire political process has been frozen by a lack of compromise, with the two leaders’ camps clashing every step of the way and constantly missing deadlines.Mr. Nuristani’s announcement on Monday also left unanswered whether the government and international donors would agree to fund the elections, which are estimated to cost at least $65 million and could be double that amount, according to some international observers. Some analysts also criticized what they characterized as a cynical move by the election commission in picking a date after the political agreement is set to expire, potentially plunging the government into a deeper crisis.“Holding the elections is a national process, and not something the election commission can do on a little island of its own,” said Shah Sultan Akefi, the head of a commission appointed to reform the electoral process.Mr. Akefi said his estimates showed the vote could be held within eight to 10 months, before the government’s deadline to avoid a political crisis.“It requires honesty and commitment from the government,” he said. “The commitment and honesty is there, but if am speaking bluntly, I am a little concerned about its extent.”Zekria Barakzai, the director of Afghanistan Democracy Watch, said it was very unlikely that the government would be able to fulfill its commitments by October, considering the erosion of trust in the election commission, the lack of funding for the vote and the fragile security situation.“If you look at the security situation around October last year, it was at its worst,” Mr. Barakzai said. “Because of security, and because of technical reasons also, I think it will be a very difficult task.”In southern Afghanistan, officials said on Monday that nine policemen had been killed in a so-called insider attack. Three new enlistees, now assumed to be Taliban infiltrators, gunned down their colleagues in the Dehrawoud District of Oruzgan Province on Sunday night, according to the district governor, Aminullah Khaliqi.“They killed nine police officers, burned the post, stole the weapons and joined the Taliban,” Mr. Khaliqi said.