https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/16/upshot/the-gang-that-always-liked-ike.html
The Gang That Always Liked Ike - The New York Times
Eisenhower  Dwight David,Friendship,High Net Worth Individuals,Augusta National Golf Club
Nov. 15, 2014
7774
For a window into a president’s soul, look at his closest personal friends. Dwight D. Eisenhower liked to decompress with a circle of wealthy businessmen who sometimes called themselves “the Gang.” Among these friends were William E. Robinson, a New York Herald Tribune executive and later president of Coca-Cola; Ellis D. Slater, president of Frankfort Distillers; Clifford Roberts, an investment banker and Augusta National Golf Club chairman; W. Alton Jones, head of the Cities Service oil company (now Citgo); and George E. Allen, a lawyer-financier-lobbyist.The Gang was ready to travel on short notice — often commandeering a corporate plane — to the president’s side at the White House; at Camp David; at his home adjoining the battlefield at Gettysburg, Pa.; or at his cottage at Augusta National in Georgia. The Gang played bridge, golfed and shot skeet together, ate steaks barbecued by the president, offered advice on politics and the economy and chuckled at his private aphorisms. (He maintained, for example, that the “two professions in which amateurs excel” are “prostitution and the military.”)Early on, Slater — known as Slats — asked Eisenhower how he would handle the presidency financially. Eisenhower replied, “Hell, this job is no easy touch.” Referring to his predecessor, he added, “Truman says I’ll be lucky if I don’t use $25,000 a year of my own money.” In recognition of this, some members of the Gang and other friends gave him gifts, such as cattle for his Gettysburg farm. They also helped finance his Augusta golf cottage — called “Mamie’s Cabin,” in the first lady’s honor.Eisenhower later boasted that no one in his personal circle ever “uttered a word that could have been embarrassing to me.” Slater, for one, dodged the public eye to spare Ike political trouble from those who might recoil at seeing their president palling around with a liquor baron.Some looked askance at Eisenhower’s choice of companions. In 1959, Senator John F. Kennedy acidly told the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. that he would have expected Eisenhower, the World War II hero, to be playing golf with his old Army friends, but carped that “all his golfing pals are rich men he has met since 1945.”Eisenhower did keep up with his Army comrades, but after V-E Day he was susceptible to the allure of the financial power elite. Having grown up on what was considered the wrong side of the tracks in Abilene, Kan., he clearly enjoyed being around such moguls. But, like him, most of his new friends had not been born into rich families. In fact, after meeting an heir of a family famous for its wealth, Eisenhower said he would hate to have to go through life with a name like his.In February 1952, Eisenhower’s cronies helped organize a wildly successful midnight rally at Madison Square Garden, which nudged him toward the presidency. Serving in Paris at the time as supreme commander of NATO, he viewed a film of the two-hour spectacle, then told a friend, with tears in his eyes, “You can go tell Bill Robinson that I’m going to run.”Once in the White House, Eisenhower leaned on his business pals to help him remedy the gaps in a lifelong soldier’s understanding of economics, saying, “I must learn the value of a dollar.” But by no means did the president uncritically accept their exhortations. During an Oval Office visit in 1959, one chum complained about high taxes and scrawled out his previous year’s income: $913,000 (more than $7 million in today’s dollars). “Stop right there,” said Eisenhower, who went on to chide “anyone feeling sorry for himself who makes that kind of money.”The president’s business chums dominated the guest lists for the small, all-male “informal stag dinners” he staged. Some of the diners hailed from the white Deep South. Eisenhower supported racial integration “as a matter of decency,” but, drawing in part on his Army experience in the South, privately expressed doubts that such a goal could be achieved quickly, even with government action. In early 1954, Earl Warren, whom Eisenhower had chosen as chief justice, was appalled when, at one such meal, the president seated him near John W. Davis,  a lawyer — and the 1924 Democratic presidential nominee — who had strenuously argued for school segregation before the Supreme Court. At the time, the court was considering Brown v. Board of Education, its milestone case on school integration, and  Warren was privately pressing his colleagues for a unanimous rejection of the existing “separate but equal” doctrine.Warren said in his memoirs, published after his death in 1974, that during the meal Eisenhower “went to considerable lengths to tell me what a great man Mr. Davis was.” The president, Warren wrote, assured him that white Southerners were “not bad people,” but simply wanted to make sure that “their sweet girls” did not sit in classes alongside “some big overgrown Negroes.” (While writing his book, Warren may have been feeling especially bitter toward Eisenhower, who had been quoted as saying that Warren’s appointment was one of his biggest mistakes as president.)Eisenhower might have developed a wider understanding of the human experience had his inner circle been more diverse. But, as with most presidents, he needed to have friends with whom he could let down at least some of his guard. In a rare confession of his own fallibility, he thanked Slater during the 1959 Christmas season for being one of those friends “who know well my faults” and were “so understanding and so generous as to forgive” the “many errors I have made.”Eisenhower lauded his Gang in the first volume of his White House memoirs, “Mandate for Change,” published in 1963. He called them “men, who, already successful, made no attempt to profit by our association.” He concluded, “Any person enjoys his or her friends; a president needs them, perhaps more intensely at times than anything else.”  