http://www.nytimes.com/2001/06/19/science/scientists-try-to-explain-the-cold-mysterious-era-of-snowball-earth.html
Scientists Try to Explain the Cold, Mysterious Era of 'Snowball Earth' - The New York Times
WEATHER,COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET
June 19, 2001
6402
About 600 million years ago, the icy reach of glaciers stretched to the tropics. That much scientists agree on. The rest -- how this happened and its effects on life -- is debated.One theory is that as ice sheets expanded from the poles, they reflected more sunlight back into space, further cooling the planet and forming more ice. Perhaps as quickly as a few centuries, this runaway cooling effect caused the entire surface of Earth to turn to ice -- and remain ice-covered for millions of years.Simple computer simulations of the past climate indicated that when the ice caps spread far enough, the rest of the planet readily froze over, giving credence to this ''Snowball Earth'' theory. However, when this theory was tested with the newer, more sophisticated models that have been developed to study present-day global warming trends, the oceans remain liquid. Unlike the simple simulations, the newer models include the circulation of the ocean currents. The mixing of warm and cool waters prevents the oceans from freezing.''What we're saying is, we're trying as hard as we can to get a Snowball Earth and we can't do it,'' said Dr. Christopher Poulsen, a professor of earth sciences at the University of Southern California.Perhaps the model lacks crucial climate elements that would tip the Earth into freezing. ''Or perhaps the data need to be reinterpreted,'' he said.Some climatologists have offered an alternative explanation for the tropical chill. At the time, they say, perhaps the Earth was lying almost on its side, still knocked over by the collision that created the Moon more than two billion years earlier. In that orientation -- the ''high obliquity'' model -- the tropics would receive much less sunshine and warmth.New computer simulations show support for this theory, scientists reported last month at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Boston.''You have to think, maybe it wasn't a Snowball Earth,'' said Dr. Gregory S. Jenkins, a professor of meteorology at Penn State who directed the new study. ''The science results show high obliquity works.''However, he does not have a detailed explanation of how the Earth would have righted itself to its current 23.5-degree inclination. ''That's a geophysicist's problem,'' he said. Perhaps, he said, the clumping of the continents at the South Pole about 600 million years ago tipped the Earth up.The mystery started decades ago  with some unusual glacial deposits. The rocks and sediments had clearly been pushed along by glaciers. But the magnetic fields preserved in the rocks indicated that they had formed near the equator. One explanation could have been that the rocks did form near one of the poles but that much later, when continental drift had carried them to the tropics, they were heated to high enough temperatures to realign the magnetic fields.In 1987, Dr. Joseph L. Kirschvink, a professor of geobiology at the California Institute of Technology, showed that a glacial rock from Australia had not been subjected to high temperatures since its formation. It was from a glacier, and the glacier had been in the tropics.''Lo and behold, it nailed it,'' Dr. Kirschvink said. ''It really hit me in the face. It's not a paradox anymore. It's an observation.''That was not the only strange observation. Around the world, when geologists looked at rocks left by the tropical glaciers, they often also saw unusual mineral deposits of iron and limestone right above them.''I said, 'There's got to be some link here,' '' Dr. Kirschvink said. ''Here they crop up, just when the glaciers were there. I sat up one night. 'Oh, it did freeze over.' ''Dr. Kirschvink proposed the Snowball Earth theory in 1992. With the oceans covered by ice, carbon dioxide burped out by volcanoes would build up in the atmosphere. Usually, the oceans absorb much of the carbon dioxide. After millions of years, the carbon dioxide, a so-called greenhouse gas that traps heat, would build up enough that global warming would kick in, and the ice would quickly melt. Within a few decades or centuries, the greenhouse effect would have transformed the planet into a sauna, with temperatures near the equator would average over 100 degrees.Those conditions, Dr. Kirschvink said, would have led to a burst of life, especially oxygen-producing blue-green algae. The presence of oxygen would have then caused iron dissolved in the water to fall out to the bottom, forming the iron deposits. ''The oceans will rust,'' Dr. Kirschvink said.In 1998, Dr. Paul F. Hoffman, a professor of earth sciences at Harvard, extended the Snowball Earth theory to explain the limestone deposits and other unusual chemical features of the rocks. ''I think that's what gave his ideas legs,'' Dr. Hoffman said of Dr. Kirschvink. ''Enigmas could suddenly accounted for with this idea.''Rainfall would have washed the carbon dioxide out of the air, turning it into carbonic acid, Dr. Hoffman said. The acids then weathered continents, and through chemical reactions, those sediments turned into the limestone when they were washed into the oceans.There have been several cold episodes in Earth's history, the first about 2.2 billion years ago. The Earth stayed warm for the next 1.5 billion years, but then suffered two to five freezes in 150 million years.The Snowball Earth proponents believe that a die-off of methane-producing bacteria -- methane is a potent greenhouse gas -- may have led to the first episode. Dr. Hoffman suggests that a change in the oceans, like a rise in sea level, may have reduced the amount of methane that naturally bubbles out, causing the more recent cold episodes.Biologists like Dr. Bruce Runnegar of U.C.L.A. wonder how life could have survived the millions of years in the oceans sealed under ice, or the transition to and from higher temperatures. ''It's hard to understand how it could deal with this very rapid cooling at the end,'' he said. ''Coming out is even more difficult. The meltdown happens equally rapidly and then it's supposed to be superhot afterwards.''The extremely high levels of carbon dioxide would have been toxic to ocean life, he said.Dr. Kirschvink takes the opposite view. The chemicals belched out by undersea volcanic vents offer a perfect growing medium for blue-green algae, he said, and they should thrive as soon as the ice melts. And a rapid rise in oxygen would have made possible the more complex chemistry used by multicelled animals.Dr. Runnegar prefers the less draconian ''Slushball Earth'' explanation, where the Earth cools enough that glaciers form on land, but the tropical oceans stay free of ice.That is what Dr. Poulsen's model indicates. Even taking into account a dimmer Sun -- the Sun produced about 7 percent less energy 600 million years ago -- and ice on the continents, the ice caps stopped far short of the equator.''We're doing all these things to nudge it to freeze over and we're not getting there,'' Dr. Poulsen said.But the geological evidence points to a hard snowball, Dr. Kirschvink said. ''If it can't handle the snowball,'' he said, ''then the climate model is wrong.''