https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/12/us/protests-police-baton-rouge.html
Escalating Discord Between Police and Protesters Strains Baton Rouge - The New York Times
Baton Rouge (La),Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Sterling  Alton B (1979-2016),Louisiana,Blacks
July 11, 2016
7044
BATON ROUGE, La. — The tensions have been national, as have the protests, the arrests, the efforts to block highways. No place has had a monopoly on anger and frustration.But here in Baton Rouge, discord between law enforcement and protesters has escalated night after night, and more than 180 demonstrators have been arrested since Friday evening. Images racing across social media of protesters facing police officers clad in riot gear are from here, as are those of SWAT trucks rolling down residential streets and of journalists being arrested.The event that set the protests off — the fatal shooting by police officers of Alton Sterling in front of the Triple S Food Mart — continues to unfold. A search warrant filed by a Baton Rouge detective in the city clerk’s office on Monday offered the most detailed account of the shooting from the police perspective.It says that police officers, responding to a call of a man who had threatened someone, spotted the butt of a gun in Mr. Sterling’s front pocket. When he refused orders and “attempted to reach for the gun,” they shot him several times to “stop the threat.”The account is unlikely to decrease tensions here, and protesters point to two different videos from the scene that they say tell a different story.Officials insist that confrontational outsiders have made protests in Baton Rouge different; demonstrators say it is the excessive tactics of the police. Others say conflicts like this were almost inevitable in a city that, according to data gathered in a 2009 report, has areas with some of the highest life expectancy and median earnings in the state, and areas — including where Mr.  Sterling was killed by the police a week ago — with some of the lowest.“The poor people get a bad break in this town,” said Russel L. Honoré, a retired Army lieutenant general who was widely praised for his role in coordinating relief efforts after Hurricane Katrina and now lives in Baton Rouge. “When we have an incident like this, it manifests itself.”Protests continued on Monday, including one at City Hall, and the police continued to respond, deploying in particular in reaction to information that demonstrators planned to block a bridge over the Mississippi River.Tensions were high, particularly after a clash on Sunday evening, when a group of protesters leaving an organized march headed on an unplanned route to the city’s Police Headquarters. There were 50 arrests over all that night.The search warrant that was filed on Monday says the police went to a judge at 5:23 a.m. last Tuesday, just after the shooting, for permission to retrieve the surveillance recorder from the Triple S.Justin Bamberg, a lawyer for Mr. Sterling’s family, said nothing on the store video will vindicate the police.Joel Porter, a lawyer for Abdullah Muflahi, the store owner, went further: He said the police account was not accurate.“That is absolutely not true,” he said. “By the time that warrant was signed, they had already commandeered my client’s building.”In a lawsuit against the city and several police officers filed Monday, Mr. Muflahi said the police did not have a search warrant when they seized the equipment, took control of his store and held him in the back of a police cruiser for four hours.A spokesman for the Police Department, Cpl. L’Jean McKneely, did not comment on the lawsuit and, asked about the timing of the warrant, said, “I don’t have specifics.”When the protesters took the unplanned route on Sunday evening, the police insisted that they disperse, acting, they said, on intelligence that the plan was to get onto the interstate. When the protesters did not leave, many gathering instead on the property of a woman who invited them to stay, a standoff ensued, for over an hour. On one side protesters were yelling and holding signs, and on the other side, the police had shields, helmets and batons.Suddenly the police moved in, some of them rushing onto the woman’s property; dozens of people were arrested.The police chief, Carl Dabadie Jr., said officers had given protesters time to move away, even after, he said, some officers were hit with rocks.Like other city and state officials, including the Louisiana governor, Chief Dabadie attributed the confrontations in Baton Rouge to outsiders.“I think that out-of-town agitators are coming in here for that reason to agitate us and to agitate the crowd,” he said in an interview in his office. “I don’t feel like our department is agitating anything.”Still, most of those arrested have been from the area, and plenty of natives had grievances about their home city.“What you’re seeing is a situation much like Ferguson and other places where you have a majority-white force policing a majority-black city,” said Donney Rose, 35. He said the response was not a surprise, given what he knows of the department.“The reason we’re talking about Alton Sterling is because it was filmed,” he said. “This could have taken place and been swept under the rug.”