https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/30/us/politics/what-to-wear-michelle-obama-is-steeped-in-protocol.html
What to Wear? First Ladies Are Steeped in Protocol - The New York Times
First Ladies (US),United States International Relations,Muslim Veiling,Obama  Michelle,Saudi Arabia,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Bush  Laura
Jan. 29, 2015
9262
WASHINGTON —  The first lady, Michelle Obama, bared her head in Saudi Arabia, but covered it at the Vatican and at an Indonesian mosque. Laura Bush wore a head scarf only briefly in Saudi Arabia and to tour the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem. Hillary Rodham Clinton covered her head in Eritrea, the West Bank and Pakistan, but did not in Saudi Arabia.Mrs. Obama inspired headlines and Internet chatter this week when she was photographed without headgear during a visit with President Obama to Riyadh, the capital of a conservative Muslim kingdom where women are compelled to cover their heads. But her attire was in keeping with diplomatic protocol and longstanding custom for Western women visiting Saudi Arabia.And that is no accident.There are dozens of rules and customs that govern what an American first lady should wear and what she should not while visiting other countries, and first ladies have to follow them all.“Mrs. Obama always wanted to be briefed completely on all the cultural traditions, from food to greetings to attire, and we would prepare a detailed memo before each trip,” said Capricia Penavic Marshall, who, as the chief of protocol for the United States from 2009 to 2013, oversaw protocol matters for the president and first lady abroad.“These are not unilateral decisions she is making,” Ms. Marshall said. “No one just decides one day that this is what I’m going to wear. It is very carefully planned.” Mrs. Obama in particular, she added, “likes to be well-informed.”Adhering to the rules is an elaborate business for first ladies, whose every outfit and accessory is scrutinized for political significance and cultural import, particularly when traveling to countries where customs bear little resemblance to Western practice.When Mrs. Bush traveled to Saudi Arabia as first lady in 2007, she went bareheaded in public almost the entire time. But when a group of breast cancer survivors she met with surprised her with a handmade black hijab, or head scarf, with tinges of pink that signify breast cancer awareness, she immediately put it on in solidarity with the women.“It was a very organic moment,” said Anita McBride, Mrs. Bush’s chief of staff at the time. “Anyone would have done it. But there was a little bit of a flap about it.”The hijab was a rare spontaneous episode in what are otherwise meticulously planned sartorial strategies on trips by first ladies. White House aides always prepare a “wardrobe memo” that accounts for cultural norms (head scarf or no?), climate and terrain (short sleeves or long? high heels or flats?), and the nature of the events (gown or suit?).“When you’re in the White House, you always tend to err on the side of being prepared,” Ms. McBride said. “The wardrobe memo was a very key ingredient and component of that.”In Mrs. Obama’s case, the stop in Saudi Arabia was a late addition to her itinerary for a trip that was initially planned only as a visit to India. When King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia died on Jan. 23, President Obama hastily changed his plans and diverted to Riyadh to pay respects.It is not clear whether Mrs. Obama knew in advance to pack for a visit to the kingdom, and the White House refused on Thursday to comment on any aspect of how Mrs. Obama chose what to wear.The first lady dressed modestly, in loose-fitting black pants and a blue tunic-length blouse, with her arms covered by a three-quarter-length coat in a matching print.Some Saudi bloggers criticized her on Twitter, using an Arabic hashtag that roughly translates to #MichelleObamaUnveiled. Many Westerners, including Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, praised her for making a stand in defiance of Muslim law.“It turned out to be much ado about nothing,” said Melanne Verveer, who as a top adviser to Mrs. Clinton traveled extensively with her when Mrs. Clinton was the first lady. “Yes, your clothes do matter. Yes, they can be interpreted, but if you dress appropriately to the society you are visiting, you make sure that no one makes news with something not intended to make news.”Like Mrs. Obama in Indonesia in 2010 and Mrs. Bush in Jerusalem, Mrs. Clinton would cover her head when visiting a mosque, but not when meeting with officials in Muslim countries. The same is true for an audience with the pope at the Vatican, where women are expected to cover their knees and shoulders as well as their heads.“There may not be a code per se, but there was guidance from the State Department, and it was to be respectful, to be accommodating in conservative societies,” said Ms. Verveer, now the director of the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and Security. “Don’t wear your sundress.”Even the best-laid wardrobe plans can go awry for a first lady, so Ms. McBride said she would often take head coverings for unforeseen events when traveling in the Middle East.She slipped a few extra scarves into her luggage during a trip to Afghanistan with Mrs. Bush, and each woman grabbed one when they disembarked from Air Force One.“We put them around our shoulders just in case we might need to pull them on for any reason when we arrived,” Ms. McBride said. “You never know.”