http://www.nytimes.com/2000/02/01/business/the-silicon-godfather-the-man-behind-taiwan-s-rise-in-the-chip-industry.html
The Silicon Godfather; The Man Behind Taiwan's Rise in the Chip Industry - The New York Times
TAIWAN,TAIWAN SEMICONDUCTOR MANUFACTURING CO,TSMC-ACER SEMICONDUCTOR MANUFACTURING CO,CHANG  MORRIS,COMPUTER CHIPS,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET
Feb. 1, 2000
7946
The assembly lines at the Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Corporation were running full tilt after midnight last Sept. 21, when the floor began to heave. A huge earthquake had struck central Taiwan 60 miles south of here. But for the luck of geography, this futuristic technology park could have resembled a scene from the most expensive disaster movie ever made.Although the quake cut off power and jostled the company's delicate silicon wafers -- ruining 28,000 of them -- it did little structural damage to Taiwan Semiconductor's five factories. The main problem was lack of electricity, which left Taiwan's largest chip maker becalmed when worldwide demand for its semiconductors was running at a fever pitch.For Morris Chang, the founder and chairman of Taiwan Semiconductor, the solution was obvious: he placed a call to Taiwan's prime minister, Vincent Siew, requesting power be restored. Within three days the lights started coming on, and less than 10 days later, Taiwan Semiconductor's factories were humming at 95 percent capacity.Taiwan's earthquake was a jolting reminder to the computer industry of its reliance on this island nation. Leading American manufacturers like Dell Computer, Compaq Computer and Hewlett-Packard blamed quake-related shortages for depressing third-quarter earnings.No company better symbolizes Taiwan's role as quartermaster to the world computer industry than does Taiwan Semiconductor. And few have had more to do with putting Taiwan there than has Mr. Chang. At 68, this mainland Chinese-born, American-educated executive is one of the titans of Taiwan industry.''People call Morris Chang the godfather of high technology in Taiwan,'' said Benny T. Hu, the president of the China Development Industrial Bank. ''He created the semiconductor industry here.''Mr. Hu's kind words come as no surprise, given that he is also vice chairman of Worldwide Semiconductor Manufacturing, Taiwan's third-largest chip maker, which Mr. Chang agreed to buy last month in a stock deal worth at least $5 billion. That was two weeks after Taiwan Semiconductor agreed to merge with TSMC-Acer Semiconductor Manufacturing, its joint venture with Acer.In a single month of deal making, Mr. Chang expanded Taiwan Semiconductor's production capacity to 3.2 million silicon wafers a year from 2.8 million. That is still far short of demand, which Mr. Chang estimates will be more than 4 million wafers this year and 5.5 million in 2001.''These last six months have really been the most painful in our company's life, because there were so many customers who depended on us,'' said Mr. Chang, a courtly, white-haired man who was born in the eastern Chinese province of Zhejiang, spent three decades as an executive in the United States, and came to Taiwan for the first time in 1985 to start a new career.''The central part of our corporate culture is to give customers what they want,'' Mr. Chang said. ''And we couldn't give them enough.''It is Mr. Chang's happy problem to be caught in one of the chip industry's periodic booms. After slumping for three years in the late 1990's, demand rebounded in the second half of 1999. That was because of the end of the Asian economic crisis and the proliferation of new digital devices -- from set-top boxes to cell phones.Analysts estimate worldwide demand for chips will grow 30 percent this year, while Taiwan Semiconductor's sales will double. The company reported 1999 earnings last week. Even with the week of lost production in September, sales rose 45.6 percent, to $2.43 billion, while net income jumped 60 percent, to $816 million. The company's shares, which trade here and in New York, have risen 80 percent since Dec. 17, giving it a market capitalization of $51 billion.Taiwan Semiconductor is growing even faster than the rest of the industry because Mr. Chang has discovered its sweet spot. Rather than design and produce integrated circuits as do Intel, Motorola and I.B.M., Taiwan Semiconductor acts as a contractor, making chips based on the designs of its customers.Mr. Chang's insight was to recognize that a growing number of small chip designers could not afford to build their own semiconductor factories. Known as fabs, these space-age complexes take at least 18 months to complete and cost from $1 billion to $2.5 billion, depending on the size.''It's hard to justify that kind of capital expenditure,'' said Calvin Chang, a semiconductor analyst at Jardine Fleming in Taipei. ''There aren't that many companies who can afford to build new fabs.''Even for full-service producers like Motorola or NEC, the cost of manufacturing a wide variety of chips in their own factories has become prohibitive. Increasingly, the semiconductor giants are farming out part of their work to contractors like Taiwan Semiconductor. Motorola has said it plans to contract 35 percent of its chip production to these so-called foundries by 2002.At the moment, foundries produce roughly 15 percent of the total output of the $160 billion semiconductor industry. But by 2010, analysts say,  they will produce half. Taiwan Semiconductor's share of the foundry market is 35 percent. Its main competitor, United Microelectronics, has a 30 percent share. It is also based in the teeming Hsinchu technology park. Together, these companies have made Taiwan a sort of country-for-hire to the semiconductor industry.Mr. Chang's personal odyssey is a chapter in the story of Taiwan's emergence as a technology power. The son of a prosperous Chinese banker who fled the Communists in 1949, Mr. Chang was sent to the United States to be educated, first at Harvard and later at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.After earning his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Stanford University, Mr. Chang joined Texas Instruments and ended up running its semiconductor division. He left in 1983 after a falling-out with his bosses and joined General Instruments, where he served a brief, disillusioning spell as president.''I had enough money not to work for the rest of my life, and I had gotten a little weary of the corporate rat race,'' said Mr. Chang, who is an American citizen. ''At that time, Taiwan beckoned.''The Taiwan government, eager to turn this island into a technology redoubt, initially recruited Mr. Chang to head an industrial research institute. But given his pedigree and experience, it was a matter of time before the government persuaded Mr. Chang to join Taiwan's drive into the semiconductor industry.In 1987, the government staked him $100 million and took a 49 percent share in what would become Taiwan Semiconductor. That, along with $58 million from Philips, the Dutch electronics company, allowed Mr. Chang to set up shop. The government still owns 15 percent of the company, while Philips owns 26.7 percent.Mr. Chang has cultivated ties with senior officials and financiers like Mr. Hu, who are close to the governing Nationalist Party. But he says he has no allegiance to the party and prefers to stay out of politics.Mr. Chang's concept of the foundry was born of an appreciation of both the virtues and limitations of Taiwan. He said he believed the country had an advantage in making wafers -- likening Taiwan to Japan, which also excels at churning out high-quality chips. Both countries, he said, had plenty of highly trained, skilled line operators, technicians and production engineers.Unlike Japan, however, which developed a design capability, Mr. Chang said he doubted Taiwan's ability to compete in the more rarefied business of designing integrated circuits.''I don't think we have enough creativity,'' he said. ''Our educational system is state-run. We are very successful at turning out engineers with basic skills, in fact better than the engineering graduates from U.S. universities. However, they are not as entrepreneurial and not as creative.''Taiwan has become a pace-setter, , cutting costs to the bone and turning its factories into supple operations capable of producing a range of chips in a single factory. At one of Taiwan Semiconductor's fabs in the Hsinchu Science Park, the manager pointed out a conveyor belt that rushed silently overhead.The belt, he explained, was used to correct imbalances in the fab's two assembly lines. Wafers were shuttled from one line to the other to ensure that both were running at capacity. Movable racks in a glassed-in storage room held boxes of wafers bound for NEC, Motorola and a dozen other companies.Still, Taiwan remains a minor player in the world of chip design, which is dominated by the United States and Japan. Even Mr. Chang's efforts to develop memory chips, which are less complex than logic chips, have come to naught. In 1994, he started Vanguard International Semiconductor, with the goal of producing dynamic random access memory, or D-RAM, chips without relying on foreign technology.But after losing more than $200 million in 1998 and 1999 and failing to make a dent in the memory-chip market, Mr. Chang recently decided  to scale back Vanguard's ambitions. Now, like Taiwan Semiconductor, it will turn out chips on a contract basis. Taiwan Semiconductor owns 25 percent of Vanguard, and analysts expect the two will be folded together.''Vanguard has been a thorn in the foot of Taiwan Semiconductor,'' said Dan Heyler, a semiconductor analyst at Merrill Lynch in Taipei. ''Investors have always wondered why T.S.M.C. spent as much time with Vanguard as it did.''For Mr. Chang, however, Vanguard was not merely about money.  ''Vanguard was going to be the second stage of creating a really powerful industry in Taiwan,'' he said wistfully. ''It was sad.''Despite the setback, Mr. Chang said he was confident that Taiwan would retain its edge in the chip industry over emerging Asian rivals like Singapore and Malaysia. In addition to five working factories in Hsinchu, Taiwan Semiconductor is building new plants here and in southern Taiwan, as well as joint venture plants in Singapore and Washington State. One will produce wafers with diameters of 12 inchs, which hold far more chips than the traditional 8-inch wafers.With a stake in the company that is worth nearly $250 million, Mr. Chang can afford to take the long view. A few years ago, he stepped back from the day-to-day management of Taiwan Semiconductor, freeing up time for a role he seems to relish: the elder statesman of industry, helping to propel his adopted country to the next rung on the technology ladder.''I have been pushing for the need for innovation, for more creativity,'' he declared, with the confidence of a man who gets Taiwan's top leaders on the phone with little trouble. ''We need to reform the educational system. It's very slow, but it's going to happen.''