https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/nyregion/dog-ticks-the-zombies-of-the-woods.html
Dog Ticks, the Zombies of the Woods - The New York Times
Ticks (Insects),Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever,Lyme Disease,New York City
June 8, 2017
9673
No scientific paper is required to prove that ticks abound in the New York City area. People who have walked through an unmown field near or in the city have probably met one. I’m equally certain their dogs have, too.Like most outdoorsmen, I have had the misfortune of being far too up close and personal with ticks over the years, and though three species of ticks are commonly encountered within the city limits, the dog tick (Dermacentor variabilis) is the one most likely to annoy hiking New Yorkers.Dog tick adults are relatively large and, consequently, are more obvious than either deer or lone star ticks. June is prime time for tick encounters; while the adult ticks are questing for blood (they are very active during the spring months), more New Yorkers are searching for a breath of fresh air in the moderate weather.Though not everyone is interested in identifying ticks — most people would prefer to spend as little time in their presence as possible — you can readily distinguish the adults of each species, if you have the stomach for it; their arachnid lives are inscrutable, and for many, just watching one creep along in its single-minded, zombielike drive for blood makes the skin crawl. A tick’s entire life is the rapacious search for a living being to sink its mouthparts into. But as with any good horror story, the tick’s is quite fascinating.All ticks mature through three life stages. The larvae, nymphs and adults — like the undead — are cursed to roam the earth in search of a suitable host. Unfortunately, ticks can afford to roam; experts estimate that they can survive up to two years without eating. And though dog tick larvae and nymphs generally seek small rodents and medium-size mammals upon which to attach themselves, they are relatively indiscriminate in their preferences. Ticks are happy to feed upon our own species as long as they don’t have to travel too far.Tick identification is quite important for anyone with a serious interest in the outdoors. The dog tick does not carry Lyme disease, but it can transmit Rocky Mountain spotted fever. So knowing what bit you can be handy when visiting your doctor. Not all ticks harbor diseases, but treatments vary considerably depending on the pathogen to which you may have been exposed.Nature isn’t always pretty, and staring at a deer or a rabbit with its ears congested with engorged ticks is enough to make anyone question a tick’s ecological role. The answer is relatively simple: Like humans, they are a cog in the gears of the natural world. In the tick’s case, they are set upon by a host of species, such as birds, reptiles, amphibians and mammals. Perhaps less obviously, ticks are a limiting factor. Though larger predators are more charismatic, ecologically speaking, a rabbit in the talons of a red-tailed hawk is no better than one hampered by a thousand tick bites. In the unsentimental way of nature, the answer to “What good are they?” is an unwavering “Well, they survive and they reproduce.”