http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/21/t-magazine/scholten-baijings-design-home.html
Scholten & Baijings’s Bright Ideas - The New York Times
Interior Design and Furnishings,Scholten & Baijings,Amsterdam (Netherlands),Scholten  Stefan (1972- ),Baijings  Carole (1973- ),Netherlands
Aug. 21, 2015
9980
A husband-and-wife team is brightening up the sober Dutch design world.On a dreary, rainy day in Amsterdam, the design studio of Stefan Scholten and Carole Baijings stands out like a fluorescent beacon. The ground floor of their two-story office overlooking the Ij lake is divided by swiveling textile panels in wild color pairings that shouldn’t harmonize — hot pink and olive green — yet somehow do. Tables are set with flowers in matte porcelain vases; shelves are laden with globes of tinted glass, test swatches and bright foam molds. Michael Maharam, for whom Scholten & Baijings have made a series of gridded textiles, called this space a “candy shop for the curious eye.” The firm has designed everything from clocks for Ikea to components for a Mini One car to dishwasher-safe Japanese porcelain that resembles recycled paper.The husband-and-wife team’s fluency with color sets them apart in the relatively muted Dutch design scene, as does their conviction that conceptual design can be married to industrial production. Scholten studied at the prestigious Design Academy Eindhoven around the time one of his professors started Droog, the influential design collective that emphasized a wry, postmodern, handmade approach to furniture and housewares — one that was openly hostile to the pragmatic concerns of industry and manufacturing. Droog prototypes — like Tejo Remy’s iconic 1991 dresser of mismatched drawers bound together by a belt — had an appealingly comic, D.I.Y. quality, but were often too costly, or too outlandish, to produce in anything but the smallest editions. Nevertheless, many of the most famous designers to come out of the Netherlands in the last two decades, from Marcel Wanders to Hella Jongerius, are associated in some way with the movement.“At school you had two options: Become a Droog designer or become a Droog designer,” Scholten jokes. “It was sort of frustrating. Somehow people thought that a creative process couldn’t be linked to an industrial process. Well, Eames did it. All the greats did. Why couldn’t we try?” In 1999, he met Baijings through a mutual friend, and the connection between them — aesthetic, romantic, dialectic — was instant. “Our method is the atelier way of working, one that emphasizes constructive thinking,” Baijings says. “It means making your own materials, your own colors, your own models, and looking at what’s happening under your hands. Is your idea really working? Or is it more suitable for another design?”Today the pair works in their studio but sketches in a light-filled home office off their bedroom. The design critic Louise Schouwenberg termed Scholten & Baijings’s hyper-elegant attention to detail “almost un-Dutch.” But their three-bedroom 1920s house on the south side of the city seems the very picture of lowlands good living. There is an antique wooden bruidskist, or wedding chest (a gift from Baijings’s parents, made in Indonesia), fresh flowers and an original marble-lined entryway, which Scholten says is “classic Amsterdam. You put all the money in the places people can see, and then forget about what’s inside.”Baijings’s grandmother lived in the house for 65 years before the couple moved in, and together they restored some parts, and gut-renovated others — like the ash-green kitchen, where they added custom aluminum cabinets and a matching wall made of textured Pandomo, a washable stuccolike surface. Arrayed on the kitchen counter is a deceptively random mix of design objects and everyday things (a bag of pasta, a few artichokes and a clove of garlic sitting on a papier-mâché and willow wood centerpiece they created for the Dutch design collector and retailer Thomas Eyck). You can find these groupings all over the house: in the room of their 20-month-old son, Rem — whose clothes are displayed on open shelves like museum pieces — and again in the living room, where timeless objects (a Josef Hoffmann tea set) mingle with family ephemera (Baijings’s hospital wristband, souvenirs from their travels, successful prototypes, failed prototypes). “Everything has a story,” Scholten says.Next year, they will unveil a furniture collection with Herman Miller and curate a show on Japanese porcelain at the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam. It seems that the more they refine their style, the wider the possibilities become. “We want to make a chair, but maybe it could be a water jar, too,” Scholten says. “If you have a design process that just goes from A to B, how creative is that? It’s only by trying new routes at the same time that you arrive at something new.”