http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/03/us/skid-row-shaken-as-los-angeles-police-kill-man-in-confrontation-caught-on-video.html
Police Are Criticized for Use of Force in Shooting in Los Angeles’s Skid Row - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Los Angeles (Calif),Homeless Persons,Los Angeles Police Department
March 2, 2015
7276
LOS ANGELES —  A line of tents and people huddled in blankets filled the sidewalks of San Pedro Street on Monday in the heart of this city’s Skid Row. The occasional police car drove by. In the middle of the block, flowers were piled next to a note bidding goodbye to a man who had called this piece of sidewalk his home until Sunday afternoon.The man, whom the police have not identified but who was known here as “Africa,” was shot to death shortly after noon on Sunday as officers tried to arrest him as a suspect in a robbery. The killing followed a series of episodes involving the deaths of apparently unarmed civilians at the hands of the police across the country that have raised questions about law enforcement tactics. A four-minute video of the fatal encounter here and its aftermath, which was taken by a bystander and uploaded to Facebook, has become a new symbol of what many people see as police abuses directed against minorities and the homeless.Witnesses here said the encounter came as the police, who have been under pressure from business leaders to deal with this searing symbol of the nation’s homeless problem just blocks from a resurgent downtown, were trying to get people to take down tents. Many resisted: Los Angeles, though in the midst of a drought, was drenched with a series of intense and bone-chilling rainstorms through Sunday afternoon.“The cops don’t want us here,” Ernie Soto, 34, who lay in a blanket near where the shooting took place, said Monday morning. “They tried to make an example out of him.”“This is Skid Row,” said Mr. Soto, who said he had lived on the streets of Los Angeles since losing a job eight years ago. “This is for the homeless. I wish I could have a home, but it didn’t work out that way.”The police said the shooting took place after the suspect resisted arrest and grabbed for the gun of an officer. At a news conference Monday afternoon, the police chief, Charlie Beck, displayed blowups of images from a video, apparently taken by an onlooker, that he said showed the suspect apparently reaching for an officer’s gun.“I have reviewed the video and the audio, and preliminarily you can hear the young officer who is primarily engaged in the confrontation saying, ‘He has my gun, he has my gun,’ ” Chief Beck said. “He said this several times.”“It appears to me that the officers acted compassionately up until the time that force was required,” Chief Beck added. “These are very difficult situations.”Investigators are going to have ample evidence to work from: In addition to video taken by bystanders, two of the police officers were wearing body cameras — part of an effort this city is taking to equip most officers with those devices.“At this early stage, we are still very far away from a determination about everything that happened,” Mayor Eric Garcetti of Los Angeles said in a separate news conference.Mr. Garcetti was quick to defend the police department, which after a long history of corruption and rough history with minority communities is now widely seen in a positive light by residents here and by police watchdogs.“This is one of the most progressive forces anywhere in the world,” Mr. Garcetti said. “Is this a force that never makes a mistake? Of course not.”A video of the episode starts with the man swinging his arms at four police officers who have him surrounded on a sidewalk lined with tents. An officer drops his nightstick and begins punching the man, knocking him to the ground. The officer then straddles the man, who continues to struggle as two more officers arrive.In the video, a woman standing nearby picks up the nightstick and appears to aim it at the officers. Two officers wrestle her to the ground and place her in handcuffs. While the remaining officers struggle with the suspect, the buzzing of a Taser can be heard; the police said that weapon had proved ineffective.The primary officer repeats the command three times before a shot is fired, followed by four more rounds. Two officers can be seen with their weapons drawn as the man lies motionless on the sidewalk.Two officers suffered minor injuries during the encounter.“They didn’t have to kill the man,” said Jesse Hayes, 39, who lives on the street here. “They are trained in martial arts, weight lifting. Come on man. Police are harassing people every day.”Irene Acero, 39, said she had been in church at the time of the shooting and had emerged to find the street in chaos. “I knew him,” she said. “He was a good guy.”She and Mr. Soto described the man as mentally unstable. Mr. Soto said the man had settled on a piece of sidewalk under a cross painted on a building.“He used to pray to the cross,” Mr. Soto said.The shooting came as this city has been struggling to deal with its homeless population, which is spread across the region, but is concentrated on Skid Row. The situation has become increasingly acute as there has been an explosion of downtown development and gentrification, putting pressure on city officials to clean up the street.“There’s no other part of the country with that level of concentrated homelessness,” said Jerry Jones, the executive director of the National Coalition for the Homeless.Steve Soboroff, the president of the Los Angeles Board of Police Commissioners, said the abundance of evidence would prove invaluable in the investigation of whether the police were justified in their actions.“There’s a tendency to try to group this with the incidents in Ferguson and the incidents in New York,” he said in an interview. “We are not the same police force, we don’t have the same procedure, and these cases were not similar. It’s really important for every one of us — the citizenry, law enforcement — not to jump to foregone conclusions.”The shooting set off bitter criticism by advocates for the homeless over how the police and deal with people living on the streets.“Here’s a situation where you have an unarmed homeless man and you have six police officers, by my count, who came to apprehend the suspect,” Mr. Jones said. “This is another senseless death of another unarmed black man at the hands of police.”Bruce Naivi, 37, a homeless man living near where the shooting took place, said he was not surprised by what had happened.“I do not feel that the police are here to protect me,” he said. “I feel more like they have a badge to kill.”