https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/28/insider/judging-love-at-the-seinfeld-diner.html
Judging Love at the ‘Seinfeld’ Diner - The New York Times
Modern Love (Times Column)
April 28, 2017
6344
We were three people facing nearly 2,000 student essays about love. In early February, we in Sunday Styles had kicked off our fourth Modern Love college essay contest, asking undergraduates nationwide to write about what love was like for them, triggering an outpouring of heartbreak and soul-searching the likes of which we had never seen (well, except for two years before, when we last held the contest).On Twitter, strangers openly pitied us, with @heybriandawson asking: “Can you imagine being the person who has to pore over Modern Love submissions from college students?”Yes, we could imagine! My two intrepid contest readers — Miya Lee and Bindu Bansinath — already had spent countless hours poring over submissions. I had been randomly reading as much as I could along the way (I would ultimately read/skim 1,100). For now, though, we had to decide how to judge them. And we were running out of time.Tired, bleary-eyed and in need of some food and caffeine, we agreed to converge on a booth at Tom’s Restaurant on Broadway and 112th Street, made famous (for its neon sign) as Monk’s Diner on “Seinfeld.” As the fictional site of so much relationship angst, it seemed an appropriate place for our deliberations.We had winnowed the 2,000 entries to 200, and from those we arrived at the diner with our personal lists of top 20 and top 5, hoping there would be enough overlap to ease our task of finding a winner and four finalists. Alas, there wasn’t.One thing Miya, Bindu and I did agree on: There seems to be a large and growing number of college men who don’t know how to respond when a woman verbally expresses affection — even when she merely says “I like you.”Despite anticipating such behavior, we were startled at how often that grinning, cornered guy made an appearance in these stories, responding with “Thanks” or “I don’t think I know what love is” or cruelly joking, “I hear they make a pill for that.”Of course, plenty of women felt similarly cornered, as did those in same-sex relationships. Fear of love (or like) knew no bounds and was among the most powerful themes we saw about that phase of life, where such professions can feel more like a threat than an offering.In one telling scene, a woman admits to a man she’s been hooking up with that she likes him. When his reaction is to bolt, she chases him down the street, claiming that she doesn’t really like him, not in that way, and essentially pleads: So can we just forget I ever said that and get back to normal?The takeaway: It’s now commonplace to try to win someone back by convincing him or her not how much you care but how much you don’t.The current political climate also played a big role in submissions, with relationships failing over competing Trump-Clinton political allegiances. And it arose in more subtle ways, too: Our winning essay by Malcolm Conner, a junior who is pre-med at Trinity University in San Antonio, Texas, explores an unlikely relationship between a transgender man and an immigrant Indian woman during a time when both feel threatened simply for being who they are.Malcolm’s essay is published as this week’s Modern Love column. The essays of our four finalists — Emily DeMaioNewton of Elon University, Clara Dollar of New York University, Ellis Jeter of Columbia University and Lauren Petersen of the University of Chicago — will appear as Modern Love columns throughout the month of May.Finally, in true collegiate fashion, procrastination ruled when it came to students getting their entries in by the March 19 midnight deadline. Two-thirds of the submissions arrived on the final day, with 600 in the final hour. Malcolm’s winning essay arrived less than two minutes before the deadline, while one of our finalists, Clara Dollar, cut it even closer, hitting “send” with just 40 seconds to spare.But who’s counting? Love is love, after all, and a win is a win.