https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/arts/design/how-the-east-was-won-a-photographic-portrait.html
How the East Was Won: A Photographic Portrait - The New York Times
Photography,National Gallery of Art,East of the Mississippi: Nineteenth-Century American Landscape Photography (Exhibit),Stoddard  Seneca Ray,Easterly  Thomas M
July 6, 2017
4320
WASHINGTON — In 1842, America was still young, incomplete and sadly lacking in monuments that might declare it singular. A photograph of Niagara Falls was the only American image included that year in a French picture book of “the most remarkable monuments of the globe.” Western explorations would record landscape prodigies later, but Americans had long been awe-struck and inspired by the lesser but still mighty Northeastern wilderness. The Hudson River School of painters, founded in 1825 by Thomas Cole, portrayed that landscape as a path to the sublime, and citizens hastened out of crowded cities to follow that path. When photography was widely introduced in 1839, photographers came too, lured by the glories of the Catskills in New York and the White Mountains of New Hampshire.Eastern landscape photographs have been largely eclipsed by images of spectacular Western sites. (Perhaps the popularity of Ansel Adams’s pictures helped establish a taste for the similar spirit of the early Western photographs.) “East of the Mississippi: Nineteenth-Century American Landscape Photography” at the National Gallery of Art here is the first comprehensive museum show to turn a light on this era of Eastern landscape photographs. Diane Waggoner, curator of 19th-century photographs, has assembled 175 images from the medium’s infancy, in 1840 to 1898; she is also chief author of the exhaustively researched catalog.Eastern landscape images, sometimes beautiful, sometimes grand, spurred tourism and development. Seneca Ray Stoddard’s “Avalanche Lake” (circa 1880) promised wilderness lovers that beetling cliffs, halcyon lakes and nature’s whispers to the longing soul were still rife in the Adirondacks. A few paintings of similar scenes and themes, testaments in gilded frames to different media walking hand in hand across rough ground, are deftly inserted between black-and-white forests, waterways and mountains. Yet often the land played second fiddle to the breakneck pace of transformation in the century.Lesser known names like Isaac H. Bonsall, Henry Peter Bosse, Thomas M. Easterly, Josiah Johnson Hawes and others have pride of place. Bonsall’s photograph of a landscape near a battlefield, taken during the Civil War, is an artful surprise. Perfectly peaceful, it centers on a waterfall plunging down a sweeping curve of rock, with soldiers posing before it. As cameras were too slow back then to stop action, landscapes became war reports: Here are encampments, here is a battlefield (the bodies lie below), here a general died. Most wartime photographs were not quite so explicitly artistic as Easterly’s; late in the century, photographers insisted more ardently that they were artists. Yet wartime landscapes doubtless created memories, even imaginary memories of war.The exhibition’s chronological progression delivers a mute lesson in various histories: the reconfiguration of the land as wilderness was settled, tamed and exploited for resources; the rise of industrialization; changes in the nation and in technology, including photographic processes.Almost all of this hews to the 19th-century notion of perpetual progress. The railroad changed life irrevocably, altering both time and vision as scenery grew unstable and raced past. Photography paid obeisance with images of tracks surging into the distance while the landscape stayed behind, as in William H. Rau’s photograph of Pennsylvania Railroad tracks by the Delaware River, circa 1893. Steamships also radically altered travel; George Barker wove an elegantly steamy romance from a ship churning toward people in port, circa 1886.Cities conquered the landscape; several images in the show might well be called cityscapes. The pre-eminence of anthracite (hard) coal mining by the 1840s, and the discovery of oil in Pennsylvania in 1859, sent industrial landscape photography, already enamored of bridges and levees, into a tizzy over machinery and half-finished iron structures. In the 1850s, Easterly took a picture of cows grazing in a drained pond before a factory spewing black smoke. Industry needed photographs for promotion, but post-Civil War industrialization so clearly made America an important power that people treasured stereographs of fields overgrown by technical apparatus.Everything, even progress — perhaps especially progress — has a cost. Land was pulverized to make room for development. Easterly registered a dwarf mountain, resembling a fairy-tale book illustration, that was “the Last of the Big Mound” during its destruction in 1869. Eventually, some photographers, including Stoddard, pictured damage, as in a mournful image, circa 1888, of a man in a dead landscape of skeletal trees drowned by floods, a visual call for better management and preservation.Our national history gained a legion of diarists after photography’s invention. (Photography, after all, means “light writing.”) Many men then jotted down visual notations about the Eastern lands. In Washington, the writing is on the wall.