http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/30/us/politics/trump-campaign-manager-corey-lewandowski.html
Corey Lewandowski, Donald Trump’s Campaign Manager, Is Charged With Battery - The New York Times
Lewandowski  Corey (1975- ),Fields  Michelle (1988- ),Assaults,Trump  Donald J,Presidential Election of 2016,Jupiter (Fla),Breitbart News Network LLC
March 29, 2016
6570
Donald J. Trump’s presidential campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, was charged with battery Tuesday by the police in Jupiter, Fla., who said he had grabbed a reporter this month as she tried to ask Mr. Trump a question.His formal arrest was detailed in a police report that cited new security-camera images of the episode, which show Mr. Lewandowski roughly pulling the reporter, Michelle Fields, out of his way — despite his vigorous denials that he ever touched her and his repeated attacks on her credibility.Mr. Lewandowski, who turned himself in on the misdemeanor charge, was quickly released. But the incident, the way the campaign has dealt with it, and the new photographic images refuting Mr. Lewandowski’s and Mr. Trump’s versions of events seemed to encapsulate much of what has made Mr. Trump’s campaign like no other.For much of the past year, fact-checkers have struggled to keep up with the frequent truth-stretching and wholesale inaccuracies of Mr. Trump and his campaign, with little discernible effect on his support among a large portion of the Republican electorate. But on Tuesday, the new video — taken from security cameras at a Trump property — confronted the Republican front-runner with a different kind of challenge: hard-to-discount visual evidence directly contradicting him, looping over and over again on cable news and news websites.Moreover, the allegation of violence came as Mr. Trump faces accusations that he incites or condones violence against protesters at his rallies.It offered a reminder that Mr. Trump, a candidate whose own communications, whether on Twitter or on television, can often be menacing in tone, has entrusted his White House bid to a political operative whose belligerence extends to physicality. On March 19, Mr. Lewandowski was captured on video grabbing a protester by the shirt collar at a Trump rally in Arizona and yanking him backward — normally the work of security guards, not a top political adviser.To Mr. Trump, Ms. Fields was out of bounds, and his campaign manager was the victim.“The news conference was over, and she was running up and grabbing and asking questions,” he said late Tuesday, in the first of several recapitulations of the episode. “She wasn’t supposed to be doing that.”But Mr. Trump’s and Mr. Lewandowski’s depiction of Ms. Fields as a drama queen faking an injury — “How do you know those bruises weren’t there before?” Mr. Trump asked — risked a new level of fallout for a candidate repeatedly accused of making misogynistic remarks who polls show is already viewed negatively by an overwhelming number of American women.Mr. Lewandowski, in the weeks since the March 8 encounter, repeatedly denigrated Ms. Fields as “delusional” and “an attention seeker.” And Mr. Trump, on Tuesday, redoubled the attack on Ms. Fields’s credibility, saying, “Wouldn’t you think she would have yelled out a scream if she had bruises on her arm?”The man whose catchphrase on the television show “The Apprentice” was “You’re fired!” said that it would be easy to fire Mr. Lewandowski, but that it wasn’t his way. “I don’t discard people,” Mr. Trump said.Nita Chaudhary, a co-founder of UltraViolet, an advocacy group that fights sexism, denounced Mr. Trump for sticking by Mr. Lewandowski. “What Donald Trump is doing fits the very definition of victim blaming, and it is not only unacceptable, it is actively dangerous,” she said. “They are belittling Michelle Fields’s claim despite overwhelming evidence.”She added: “Comments like this essentially perpetuate violence against women.”All told, it was the latest in a series of self-inflicted wounds by Mr. Trump’s campaign, and effectively upstaged his much-ballyhooed rally in the Wisconsin hometown of Representative Paul D. Ryan, the House speaker — scheduled after Mr. Ryan sharply condemned Mr. Trump’s rhetoric.Mr. Lewandowski’s arrest prompted renewed criticism from Mr. Trump’s rivals in both parties. Alice Stewart, a spokeswoman for Senator Ted Cruz, Mr. Trump’s chief rival, said “abusive behavior” seemed to be “part of the culture of the Trump campaign.”“Personal attacks, verbal attacks and now physical attacks have no place in politics or anywhere else in our society,” she said.And the Democratic front-runner, Hillary Clinton, told reporters that Mr. Trump had for months been “inciting violent behavior, aggressive behavior that I think is very dangerous.” She added that Ms. Fields “deserves a lot of credit for following through on the way she was physically manhandled.”The episode involving Ms. Fields set off an incendiary dispute within Breitbart News, the conservative website where she worked and that has at times been a vocal champion of Mr. Trump. Several of its journalists resigned after accusing management of failing to support Ms. Fields, who resigned on March 14, six days after the episode.Before her resignation, one of Breitbart’s top executives, Joel B. Pollak, publicly questioned the veracity of her claims. On Tuesday, after Mr. Lewandowski’s arrest, Mr. Pollak wrote on Twitter, “Clearly I was wrong.”The incident in question occurred  on March 8, as Mr. Trump’s victories in the so-called Super Tuesday contests on March 1 gave way to more mixed results in subsequent contests. As he made his way out of a crowded room after a news conference at Trump National Golf Club, Ms. Fields approached him.Ms. Fields said she was trying to ask Mr. Trump a question about affirmative action when Mr. Lewandowski grabbed her and nearly knocked her off her feet. She posted on Twitter a picture of finger-shaped bruises on her arm.Mr. Lewandowski denied touching her, but Ms. Fields pressed charges three days later. The investigating officer, Detective Marc Bujnowski, took statements from her and from a Washington Post reporter, Ben Terris, who was a witness.Security video footage from the Trump golf club “parallels what Fields had told me,” the detective wrote: Mr. Lewandowski “grabbed Fields left arm with his right hand, causing her to turn and step back.”Indeed, the new security-camera images show Mr. Lewandowski reaching for and then grabbing Ms. Fields’s arm, tugging at her clothing as he pulls her, then walking ahead of her as she reacts, close behind Mr. Trump. The entire episode takes less than four seconds.Mr. Lewandowski turned himself in at the headquarters of the Jupiter Police Department at 8:10 a.m. on Tuesday. He was charged with one count of simple battery and given a court date of May 4 in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.A spokeswoman for Mr. Trump, Hope Hicks, said Tuesday that Mr. Lewandowski was “absolutely innocent of this charge,” that he would plead not guilty and that he had not been arrested but had merely been issued a “notice to appear.”But Officer Joseph Beinlich, a spokesman for the department, said otherwise. “A notice to appear is an actual arrest,” he said.Mr. Lewandowski, 42, has been a combative and sometimes divisive figure in Mr. Trump’s circle. He has been known to scream and curse at reporters with regularity, putting some on a “blacklist” for coverage he considers unfavorable.In 1999, as chief of staff to Bob Ney, then a Republican representative from Ohio, Mr. Lewandowski was charged with a misdemeanor when he took a pistol into a congressional office building. He said then that it had been an accident. The police seized the weapon, prompting him to sue unsuccessfully in federal court, claiming he had been stripped of his gun without due process.Before his late-afternoon remarks on Mr. Lewandowski’s behalf, Mr. Trump responded to his arrest in a string of midday Twitter posts.“Wow, Corey Lewandowski, my campaign manager and a very decent man, was just charged with assaulting a reporter. Look at tapes — nothing there!” he wrote in one.In another, Mr. Trump appeared to raise questions about Ms. Fields’s veracity, asking why people were not looking at her “earliest statement as to what happened,” from “before she found out the episode was on tape.”To which Ms. Fields responded in her own Twitter post: “Because my story never changed. Seriously, just stop lying.”