http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/13/us/sharpton-will-call-for-2nd-officer-to-be-prosecuted-in-walter-scott-shooting.html
Day of Mourning for Walter Scott in South Carolina Town - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Scott  Walter L (1950-2015),Slager  Michael T (1981- ),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Sharpton  Al,North Charleston (SC)
April 12, 2015
7342
NORTH CHARLESTON, S.C. — Most of the congregation had left the sanctuary at the Charity Missionary Baptist Church on Sunday afternoon when yet another man approached Mayor R. Keith Summey and embraced him. “Keep praying for me,” Mr. Summey said softly. “Keep praying for me.”Eight days after a shooting here left a black man, Walter L. Scott, dead and a white police officer, Michael T. Slager, charged with murder, this city on Sunday conducted a semiofficial day of public mourning. Mr. Summey and North Charleston’s police chief, Eddie Driggers, were among the government officials who attended events to memorialize Mr. Scott, whose funeral was held on Saturday in nearby Summerville.“What happened here today is starting the healing that has to go on between communities,” Mr. Summey told reporters after the church service, which included a sermon by the Rev. Al Sharpton, the civil rights leader. “And I think today was an example of a full explanation of how we have to react to things in life. We have to do what’s right, but then we need to come together to try to find ways to make sure that doesn’t happen again.”Chief Driggers, who said on Wednesday that an amateur video of the shooting had “sickened” him, declined to comment.A small crowd gathered at midafternoon on Sunday at the site of the shooting for a prayer vigil. A spokesman for Mr. Scott’s survivors said no family members had attended Sunday’s events.The conciliatory and united scenes here on Sunday came amid talk of larger protests of police practices. In the church’s vestibule, stacks of fliers calling for a Monday “mass demonstration against police brutality” awaited congregants as they left.And the events here played out amid mounting questions about whether other officers who responded to the shooting should be prosecuted. Much of that debate has focused on Clarence Habersham, a black officer who did not fire any rounds at Mr. Scott and arrived on the scene shortly after the confrontation between Mr. Scott and Mr. Slager. (Mr. Scott, who had been pulled over for a broken taillight, is believed to have run from his vehicle because he feared arrest over child-support obligations.)In a two-sentence report filed after the shooting, Officer Habersham wrote that he had “attempted to render aid to the victim by applying pressure to the gunshot wounds” and by helping to coordinate the emergency response. But critics of Officer Habersham questioned his account and said video evidence indicated that he had done little to assist Mr. Scott. They also suggest that Officer Habersham omitted significant information from his report — for instance, that Mr. Slager dropped an item, possibly his Taser stun gun, near Mr. Scott after the shooting. Officer Habersham could not be reached for comment on Sunday.In an interview on Saturday, Mr. Sharpton became the highest-profile figure so far to demand that Officer Habersham face indictment. “Given what I’ve seen, he certainly should be held accountable,” he said. “What charge, I don’t know. But certainly he should not walk away without facing some accountability in the justice system.”Mr. Slager was dismissed after the shooting, and he has been held without bond at the Charleston County jail since his arrest on Tuesday. Officials here have not ruled out that other officers, including Officer Habersham, could be disciplined, but the municipal authorities are not leading the criminal inquiry into the shooting. Instead, the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division is investigating.On Sunday afternoon Mr. Summey, the mayor, supported some of Officer Habersham’s account. “I haven’t seen all of the videos yet, but I know that the one officer that arrived secondly did try to prevent the bleeding,” he said. “If it was fast enough, I don’t know, but he was directing the ambulance in. I know that part; what he saw, I don’t know.”