https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/05/movies/at-the-movies-our-monsters-ourselves.html
At the Movies: Our Monsters, Ourselves - The New York Times
Movies,Get Out (Movie),The Handmaid's Tale (TV Program),The Mummy (Movie),Colossal (Movie),Kong: Skull Island (Movie),Planet of the Apes (Movie),Science Fiction,Web-Original Programming,Anger (Emotion),Vigalondo  Nacho,Peele  Jordan,Invasion of the Body Snatchers (Movie)
May 5, 2017
9540
Summer is fast approaching, and so too is a cavalcade of creeping, slithering, stomping monsters. The nifty independent “Colossal,” which features a Godzilla-like creature terrorizing Seoul, South Korea, is still in theaters. “Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2” and its science-fiction bestiary opened on Friday, May 5. The latest “Alien” movie is drooling in the wings, and “The Mummy” lands in June. The next “Planet of the Apes” flick arrives in July, and while that franchise may not feature traditional fiends, it finds the monstrous in a familiar place: human beings. Our chief film critics, Manohla Dargis and A. O. Scott, discuss monsters and wonder how they could be any more frightening than real life.MANOHLA DARGIS Gee, Tom Cruise looks kind of grim in the trailers for “The Mummy,” the first entry in Universal’s shared monster world — not to be confused with Warner Bros. and Legendary’s MonsterVerse. Mr. Cruise tends not to go light and funny, alas, and this trailer suggests that he will not be camping it up here, probably because there’s too much money at stake. Universal is exhuming a batch of its classic monsters — the Invisible Man, the Wolf Man and Frankenstein’s creature — and synergistically bringing them together.This year’s battle of the creatures started in March with “Kong: Skull Island,” the second in Warner/Legendary’s MonsterVerse, following the disinterment of Godzilla back in 2014. There are all sorts of reasons that we love our monsters — they’re mirrors of our fears and fantasies, to begin with — but one of the biggest reasons the creatures are being unleashed is that the major studios are looking for a way to entice audiences. That’s crucial given that Disney is so dominant now and owns not only Pixar, a brand that feels like an integrated world unto itself, but also the “Star Wars” franchise and Marvel, each with a shared fictional universe that seems to allow for endless permutations.A. O. SCOTT The monsters were there before the superheroes: King Kong, the Wolf Man and the melancholy Frankenstein monster with the bolts in his neck (who stole his Promethean creator’s name) were branded studio properties all the way back in the 1930s and ’40s, and have been ever since. They were joined after World War II by Japanese imports like Godzilla and then by H.R. Giger’s tireless and protean Alien at the end of the ’70s. These creatures, however many times they are killed off onscreen, are endlessly renewable properties. This kind of movie doesn’t depend on stars, and the speedy evolution of special-effects technology means that the monsters can always get bigger, scarier and more real.They also find new ways to morph into metaphors. The vampires and zombies that recently enjoyed their moments in the pop-cultural sun crystallized collective anxieties about sex and dehumanization. We’re afraid of (and fascinated by) our own desires and panicked by the thought of being turned into (or revealed to be) shambling, brainless consumers. The classic monsters, though — smashing cities, swatting planes out of the sky, exploding out of torsos — are embodiments of rage. And there seems to be an awful lot of that these days.DARGIS Oh, we humans do love our self-regarding metaphors: It’s always about us. While there is a bottom-line rationale, and though I’m allergic to zeitgeist stories, it’s fascinating to think about the eras in which certain cinematic horrors emerge. Most of Universal’s famed monsters, for instance, starting with the original “Dracula” in 1931, suaved in during the Great Depression, which was monstrous in more ways than one. The Wolf Man, the last of the studio’s marquee monsters from that period, howled in 1941, yet by then there was a far graver threat — Adolf Hitler — on the scene. To judge from some recent movies, the threat is far closer to home, sometimes uncomfortably so.There are the monsters, like the new King Kong, which deliver an environmental cautionary tale, much as “Jaws” did in the 1970s, a decade filled with nature-bites-back stories. Thus far this year, though, the two movies with the most inventive, rage-fueled monster metaphors have been “Get Out” and “Colossal,” in which the monster is squirmingly familiar. Both start out as comedies that soon morph into increasingly serious, scary horror stories, and each brings to mind Walt Kelly’s famous Pogo line, a lamentable truth he used for the first Earth Day in 1970: “We have met the enemy and he is us,” a phrase that has been making the rounds again since the presidential election.SCOTT I’m glad you brought up “Colossal” and “Get Out,” both of which confront just how divided “we” are. (Since the movies have been in theaters for a while, I think we can get a little spoiler-y). In “Colossal,” Anne Hathaway’s character, Gloria, a drifting young adult of a familiar indie-movie type, discovers that the monster is her. Or more precisely, for reasons left delightfully unexplained, that whenever she steps into a playground sandbox in her generic American hometown, a giant scaly lizard appears in Seoul and does a lot of damage. The beast is the manifestation of her anger and frustration, and it’s soon joined by a rival: a giant robot who is the alter id of Oscar, a childhood friend of Gloria’s played by Jason Sudeikis.One of the brilliant things about “Colossal,” written and directed by Nacho Vigalondo, is the way it entwines low-key post-mumblecore comedy, genuine horror and feminist insight. While Oscar and Gloria are both angry, their fury is not symmetrical or equivalent. Oscar, who seems like a nice enough guy at first, turns out to be part of the brotherhood of angry dudes who swarm like locusts on social media and elsewhere, spewing a toxic brew of belligerence, entitlement and whining self-pity. One minute he’s a passive-aggressive gaslighter, the next a homicidal maniac, threatening to wipe out innocent people on the other side of the world if he doesn’t get his way.Gloria’s rage, in contrast, is partly the result of a lifetime of having to deal with guys like him.DARGIS The male troll is truly the monster of the moment, as “Ghostbusters” reminded us last summer. In “Colossal,” to be monstrous means to be incredibly powerful and have dominion over life and death. To an extent, the movie falls along a familiar gender divide when it comes to morality (a divide backed by science!): Gloria is horrified by her newfound ability — specifically its tragic consequences — while Oscar embraces his murderous power. In other words, she may be a mess and an alcoholic, but her moral identity is far stronger than his. Like Jeffrey Dahmer, Oscar has to drink to excess before he kills, drowning whatever tiny inner voice he has in beer before rampaging.We may love female monsters — the bandaged villain in the new “The Mummy” is one — and we’re fascinated by true-life horror stories of women who commit ghastly crimes. But many seem to retain doubts whether women can be wholly monstrous; whether they’re capable of crushing enemies nonmetaphorically. In an NBC News/Survey Monkey poll, for instance, a majority of military and veteran voters didn’t believe that Hillary Clinton, despite being a former secretary of state, could ably serve as commander in chief. Obviously some voters thought her monstrous, but for others she may not have been monstrous enough because, really, we don’t just love monsters, we love the monsters in us.SCOTT Which is why we shed a tear for poor King Kong. Monster movies are spectacles of ambivalence. We want to see those wantonly destructive powers unleashed, and then we want to see them tamed. It’s exciting when cities are trampled, but we also need to see the rampaging beast brought down, perhaps by a good monster who comes to the defense of humanity. To stick with “Colossal” for one more beat, as Gloria becomes the heroine and Oscar emerges as the villain, he becomes the more interesting character, and her monster becomes the responsible, punitive one (speaking of gender stereotypes) who will put a stop to his tantrum.But there’s also another kind of story, in which the forces of order and responsibility are themselves revealed to be monstrous. This is the dystopian premise of the Hulu series “The Handmaid’s Tale” (any roster of female monsters in 2017 has to include Ann Dowd’s terrifying, cattle-prod-wielding Aunt Lydia), and also, of course, of “Get Out,” which practices a brilliant reverse demonization. It’s the sane, liberal-minded, friendly white people in that movie who are revealed to be evil, and that movie carries an unsettling implication that starts in American racial pathology and spreads outward like a bloodstain on a creamy linen napkin. What is truly monstrous is what appears to be most normal. Jordan Peele has made a horror movie that’s especially effective in messing with the expected metaphorical interpretation. Those monsters are us. Not symbolically, but literally.DARGIS In one way, Mr. Peele reverses the setup of “Invasion of the Body Snatchers,” where the threat comes from outer space (much as in other 1950s science-fiction films) and involves aliens replacing real people with “pod people.” In “Get Out,” the threat doesn’t come from somewhere else, someplace out there — from deep space or an imaginary Transylvania — but from smiling whites who, like slave owners before them, traffic in black bodies. We’re at the juncture where history meets metaphor for something we can call monstrous whiteness. But part of what makes the movie work isn’t just how it rethinks the monster and its origins, but how it redefines the very idea of the disaster.In her 1965 essay, “The Imagination of Disaster,” Susan Sontag offered a kind of taxonomy of science-fiction films, which she wrote distract us but also “normalize what is psychologically unbearable, thereby inuring us to it.” In the wake of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, worldwide annihilation had never seemed more possible, and plenty of science-fiction movies invoked the threat of global destruction, entertained us with spectacular violence and neutered the threat. Movies like “Godzilla” and “Independence Day” have continued to do the same. “Get Out,” by contrast, locates its disaster in contemporary America, where the past — and white prosperity built on the backs of enslaved blacks — continues to generate a catastrophic, deadly existential threat.SCOTT It’s scary how that word “normalize” jumps right out of the ’60s into 2017, when an awful lot of reality itself can be classified as “psychologically unbearable.” And of course the movie theater remains, to borrow a popular phrase, a safe space, where horror can exorcise other feelings, among them the many available varieties of guilt. Some critics have suggested that satire has reached a state of exhausted redundancy, that laughter, far from being the best medicine, now functions as a kind of placebo. Howls of inhuman rage and screams of abject terror, on the other hand, may be just what the doctor ordered.