https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/07/science/when-it-comes-to-sleep-timing-is-everything.html
When It Comes to Sleep, Timing Is Everything - The New York Times
Sleep,Brain,Fruit Flies,Blau  Justin
Oct. 6, 2014
848
Whether it’s lying wide awake in the middle of the night or falling asleep at an international business meeting, many of us have experienced the funk of jet lag. New research has uncovered some of the mysteries behind how our cells work together to maintain one constant daily rhythm, offering the promise of defense against this disorienting travel companion.Many organisms, including humans and fruit flies, have pacemaker neurons — specialized cells in the brain that have their own molecular clocks and oscillate in 24-hour cycles. But in order for an organism to regulate itself, all of these internal clocks must tick together to create one master clock.While scientists understood how individual neurons set their own clock, they didn’t know how that master clock was set. Working with young fruit flies, whose neuronal system is simpler than adults with fewer cells and easier to study, the researchers found that two types of neurons, which they called dawn cells and dusk cells, maintain a continuous cycle. As the sun rises, special “timeless” proteins, as they’re called, help the dawn cells to first signal to each other and then signal to the dusk cells. Then as the sun sets, proteins help the dusk cells signal to each other and then signal back to the dawn cells. Each signal tells the cells to synchronize with each other. Together, these two distinct signals drive the daily sleep and wake cycle.“This really shifts our view of these cells as super strong, independent oscillators to much more of a collective group working together to keep time,” said Justin Blau, a neurobiologist at New York University and co-author of the study.Biologists hope that by understanding more about how the connections between these pacemaker neurons work, they can try to decrease the amount of time it takes for people traveling to new time zones to adjust. Dr. Blau thinks that by loosening the connection between both the dawn and dusk cells, individual pacemaker neurons may be able to reset their clocks faster and allow people to recover more quickly from jet lag. However, he emphasizes that this idea still requires a better understanding of the pathways that help the cells to communicate.Erik Herzog, a biologist at Washington University in Saint Louis who was not involved in the study, said that our ability to synchronize to the dawn and dusk cycle is quite potent. “Only in the last 150 years have we been able to leave lights on at night,” he said. “We have not yet evolved to the challenge of crossing time zones really quickly.”But Dr. Herzog is optimistic that the new study will help pave the way for future discovery. “The more we know about the neurons and the signals they use, the more clues we have about how to get these signals to perform better,” he said.