https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/16/business/dealbook/what-nelson-peltz-is-up-to-with-his-3-5-billion-stake-in-pg.html
What Nelson Peltz Is Up To With His $3.5 Billion Stake in P.&G.; - The New York Times
Peltz  Nelson,Procter & Gamble Co,Trian Fund Management LP,Stocks and Bonds,Gillette Co,Taylor  David S
Feb. 16, 2017
278
For Nelson Peltz and his big investment in Procter & Gamble, the timing could be as important as the strategy. The activist investor’s company, Trian Partners, disclosed a $3.5 billion position in P.&G., the maker of Tide detergent and Crest toothpaste, on Tuesday, but did not include any proposals for improving shareholder returns. Whatever he has in mind, consumer stocks like P.&G. are well positioned for a tougher economic environment.Procter & Gamble has proved a tough target. A fellow corporate agitator, Bill Ackman, plowed some $1.8 billion into the company in mid-2012. After helping push out the chief executive to bring back a former boss, A. G. Lafley, Mr. Ackman’s Pershing Square exited the position after just two years without the big return he typically expects from his concentrated investments.Since Mr. Ackman’s departure, Procter & Gamble has made some further progress. Mr. Lafley was replaced by David Taylor, a veteran of the company who promised to keep streamlining the enterprise. Procter & Gamble offloaded Duracell batteries and the beauty brands Clairol and Covergirl. Even so, moving the share price at the $230 billion titan has been difficult, opening the door for Mr. Peltz.Breaking up the company may be one option. Although Mr. Peltz unsuccessfully pushed such an idea at Pepsi, analysts from Bernstein already have sent letters to Mr. Taylor and the board supporting the idea. Gillette could be an area of focus for Mr. Peltz. Procter & Gamble paid more than $50 billion for it in 2005, but the razor operation has come under increasing pressure from start-ups like Harry’s that offer cheaper alternatives through subscription services that cater to younger consumers. Unilever recently bought a Gillette rival, the Dollar Shave Club, giving it a stronger backer.Either way, Procter & Gamble at least offers some downside protection for Mr. Peltz. Consumer staples are often resilient when the economy starts to crack. P.&G. has one of the most consistent dividend track records of American companies, a feature that investors especially prize when stock prices stagnate.The United States is already at near full employment, and the stretch of growth since 2009 is one of the longest in the country’s history. That suggests another recession may not be far off. Odds are that Mr. Peltz has something bigger in mind, but he picked a good time to try scrubbing up Procter & Gamble.