http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/13/sports/golf-women-s-group-vows-to-pressure-augusta.html
GOLF; Women's Group Vows To Pressure Augusta - The New York Times
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS,JOHNSON  WILLIAM,BURK  MARTHA,MASTERS GOLF TOURNAMENT,AUGUSTA NATIONAL (GOLF COURSE),WOMEN,GOLF
July 13, 2002
6368
An attempt to open the Augusta National Golf Club in Georgia, the site of the Masters tournament, to female members will be intensified, the woman behind the move said yesterday. She also said that a defiant response to her suggestions had cut off the possibility of dealing directly with the club about the issue.Last month Martha Burk, chairwoman of the National Council of Women's Organizations, wrote to William (Hootie) Johnson, the club's chairman and the official in charge of the Masters. She urged the private club to open membership to women before the next Masters, in April.Of the club's 300 or so members, there are no women and fewer than 10 African-American men. Women have played at the club, but only with club members and as their guests.Last week, in a strongly worded statement, Johnson said the club would not be bullied, threatened or intimidated. He added, ''There may well come a day when women are invited to join our membership, but that timetable will be ours and not at the point of a bayonet.''Burk's organization is the nation's oldest and largest coalition of women's groups, with 160 member groups. From her Washington office, she said there was no plan yet. ''We have a number of options open,'' she said. ''But in what order, with what timetable, we have not decided yet.''Most women's organizations are our members. They are pleased we are doing this. They are 100 percent behind our effort.''In Johnson's statement responding to Burk's letter, he said Burk and her associates ''view themselves as agents of change.''He added, ''We expect such a campaign would attempt to depict the members of our club as insensitive bigots and coerce the sponsors of the Masters to disassociate themselves under threat, real or implied, of boycotts and other economic pressures.''Burk indicated she had been taken aback by Johnson's angry response. ''He went ballistic,'' she said. ''He has ended any possibility of direct communication. My choice is to communicate with others, and that may include sponsors of the Masters and individual members of the club. Although we have no plan yet, we will have one, well thought out. It will be orderly and quite rational. This will all go somewhere.''