https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/14/world/asia/mountainous-rooftop-addition-draws-notice-in-beijing.html
Beijing Orders Demolition of Rooftop Art - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Beijing (China),China,Zhang Biqing
Aug. 13, 2013
7458
BEIJING — In a city brimming with look-at-me architecture, the sprawling addition that Zhang Biqing, a health care magnate, built atop his 26th-floor apartment is a showstopper.Constructed with ersatz boulders, crisscrossed by trellises and walkways and dotted with the occasional shrub, the two-story aerie resembles the idealized mountains depicted in classical Chinese paintings — except the requisite lonely monk of yore has been replaced by a flashy karaoke parlor.The entire 8,000-square-foot addition, as it turns out, is illegal. On Monday, The Beijing Morning Post featured a front-page photograph of Mr. Zhang’s garish rooftop expansion, along with disturbing accounts of how the well-connected entrepreneur blithely ignored his neighbors’ complaints during the six years he spent creating his craggy villa atop a luxury gated complex in western Beijing.Residents were so tortured by the din of nonstop construction — and the resulting leaks and cracked walls — that several of them sold their apartments and moved out. One next-door neighbor was reportedly beaten up after he confronted Mr. Zhang about the project, which is said to have cost more than $4 million.The story, zealously covered by much of the Chinese news media on Tuesday, seemed to embody the popular perception that the rich and powerful can simply do as they please. According to news reports, Mr. Zhang amassed a fortune through a chain of traditional Chinese medicine clinics he owned, or through private acupuncture sessions he provided. Disciples claimed that Mr. Zhang could cure chronic neck pain or even cancer.Until recently, he was a local delegate to the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, an advisory body to the ruling Communist Party.And as Mr. Zhang thumbed his nose at his complaining neighbors, he suggested that he had friends in high places, according to The Beijing Morning Post. He also brushed off gripes about the late-night warbling that emanated from his karaoke studio by boasting about the stature of the singers. “I’m not afraid of the complaints,” he reportedly told a property management employee. “And you can’t stop famous people from singing when they come here.”Code enforcement officials said they had been stymied by Mr. Zhang’s refusal to let them through the door of his apartment. The deputy head of the Purple Bamboo Park urban management district said that he had even sent inspectors to the building’s underground parking garage but that Mr. Zhang had managed to evade them.“If we can’t calculate the scope of this illegal construction, we can’t issue a notice requiring him to dismantle it,” the official told the newspaper.By Tuesday, however, officials had slapped a notice on Mr. Zhang’s front door, giving him 15 days to remove the addition or present evidence that it had been legally constructed. Later, in a brief phone interview with the state broadcaster CCTV, Mr. Zhang asserted that the structure was safe, but conceded that it might have been a folly after all.“Now I realize it was a huge mistake,” he said, adding that he would dismantle the addition within a week.Not everyone is thrilled to see it go. An elderly man who lives on the 21st floor and whose son owns two apartments on the 25th floor, said he was not bothered by Mr. Zhang’s illegal penthouse. In fact, he said he thought the structure was a eye-pleasing capstone to an otherwise drab high-rise.Standing in front of the building Wednesday morning, the man, who declined to give his name, said he thought Mr. Zhang’s biggest mistake was failing to keep fellow tenants happy. “Who doesn’t disturb the neighbors when you’re doing construction?” he asked. “You just have to buy them fruit and gifts and things.”