https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/us/politics/trump-travel-ban-grandparents.html
Grandparents Win Reprieve From Trump Travel Ban in Federal Court - The New York Times
Refugees and Displaced Persons,Immigration and Emigration,Supreme Court (US),Trump  Donald J,Watson  Derrick Kahala,Hawaii,Executive Orders and Memorandums,Decisions and Verdicts,United States Politics and Government
July 14, 2017
3442
LOS ALTOS, Calif. — A federal judge in Hawaii ruled late Thursday that the Trump administration’s temporary ban on travelers from six predominantly Muslim countries and on refugees should not prevent grandparents and other close relatives of residents from entering the United States.The judge, Derrick K. Watson of Federal District Court in Honolulu, also declared that refugees with ties to a resettlement agency that was committed to receiving them had a relationship that made them eligible to enter the country.If it stands, the decision could open the gates for thousands of refugees who have been cleared to enter the United States but who lacked the close relationships as defined by the Trump administration. Opponents of the ban cheered the ruling, while Attorney General Jeff Sessions sharply criticized it and said on Friday he would appeal it directly to the United States Supreme Court.Last month, the Supreme Court ruled that a scaled-back version of the travel ban could proceed. Applicants who could show a “bona fide relationship” with a “person or entity” in the United States would be exempt from the 90-day ban on travelers from Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen and the 120-day ban on refugees from around the world. The decision was a partial reversal of an earlier ruling by Judge Watson that had blocked the ban from taking effect.The Supreme Court did not specify which individuals or entities would qualify as close relations. However, the State Department said that spouses, parents, parents-in-law, children, sons- and daughters-in-law, fiancés and siblings of those already in the United States would be included. Close relations would not include grandparents, grandchildren, uncles, aunts, nephews, nieces, cousins, and brothers- and sisters-in-law. The department said it was following guidelines laid out in immigration law.It also decided that a resettlement agency’s relationship to those it planned to settle in the United States would not circumvent the ban.Hawaii, one of the Democratic-led states that have been fighting the ban, challenged the administration’s interpretation of what constitutes a close relationship. Judge Watson agreed that the White House contradicted the Supreme Court’s order.“Common sense, for instance, dictates that close family members be defined to include grandparents,” he wrote. “Indeed, grandparents are the epitome of close family members. The government’s definition excludes them. That simply cannot be.”The judge also said that a refugee’s ties to a resettlement agency met the standard set by the Supreme Court for a bona fide relationship to an entity in the United States.“An assurance from a United States refugee resettlement agency, in fact, meets each of the Supreme Court’s touchstones,” he wrote. “It is formal, it is a documented contract, it is binding, it triggers responsibilities and obligations, including compensation, it is issued specific to an individual refugee only when that refugee has been approved for entry by the Department of Homeland Security.”About 60 percent of all refugees admitted to the United States last year had family ties. That figure drops to about 25 percent for those from Syria and the Democratic Republic of Congo, among the most common sources of refugees in recent years.Mark Hetfield, president and chief executive of HIAS, a refugee and resettlement agency, called Judge Watson’s ruling “a sensible and humane interpretation of the plain words of the Supreme Court.”“Now grandparents and grandchildren who are refugees can be reunited with close family in the U.S., and U.S. communities can welcome those refugees for whom they have been waiting,” he said.It was unclear when or if the ruling would take effect, and the attorney general quickly vowed to challenge it before the Supreme Court.“Once again, we are faced with a situation in which a single Federal District Court has undertaken by a nationwide injunction to micromanage decisions of the coequal executive branch related to our national security,” Mr. Sessions said in a statement. “The Supreme Court has had to correct this lower court once, and we will now reluctantly return directly to the Supreme Court to again vindicate the rule of law and the executive branch’s duty to protect the nation.”Judge Watson and other federal judges had ruled that the travel ban unconstitutionally discriminated against Muslims. The Supreme Court did not answer that question but agreed to hear arguments in the fall. In the meantime, it allowed a partial ban to proceed, affecting those without bona fide relationships in the United States, the ones least likely to win legal protection.Under his executive order, Mr. Trump capped the number of refugee admissions in the fiscal year ending on Sept. 30 at 50,000, down from 110,000 allowed by President Barack Obama. But the Supreme Court said that refugees with bona fide relationships in the United States should be admitted even if the government reached the 50,000 cap, which it did this past week.