https://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/24/world/asia/24roh.html
Former President Roh Moo-hyun of South Korea, Embroiled in Bribery Scandal, Was Overwhelmed by Despair - The New York Times
Roh Moo Hyun,Suicides and Suicide Attempts,Bribery,South Korea
May 23, 2009
4371
SEOUL, South Korea — Before dawn on Saturday, former President Roh Moo-hyun of South Korea switched on his computer and typed a suicide note — his last comment on a corruption scandal that threatened to undo his proudest, and last remaining, legacy: his record as an upstanding political leader.“Don’t be too sad,” Mr. Roh said in the note, meant for his wife and two children. “Life and death are all parts of nature. Don’t be sorry. Don’t blame anyone. Accept it as fate.”An hour and a half later, as the sun rose through a cloudy sky, Mr. Roh, 62, climbed a hill overlooking his native village of Bongha, on the south coast, and jumped off a cliff.In his last months, Mr. Roh had seen his personal achievements clouded by accusations of corruption and many of his political accomplishments undone.Mr. Roh, who was president from 2003 to 2008, devoted much of that time — and abundant foreign aid — to nurturing warmer relations with North Korea. But after South Koreans grew frustrated with the North’s recalcitrance, especially regarding its nuclear weapons program, they turned to a conservative leader, Lee Myung-bak, who promised to take a tougher stance.Since Mr. Lee’s election, the North has lashed out, recently launching a long-range rocket despite objections from the West, quitting talks aimed at getting it to dismantle its nuclear facilities and threatening to close one of the clearest symbols of North-South progress: the industrial complex in Kaesong where South Korean companies employ North Korean workers.Those who were close to Mr. Roh said the charges of corruption, which his allies say were politically motivated, were especially painful because he had made his name as a “clean” politician refusing to follow in the path of his predecessors; every former South Korean president since the 1980s has faced corruption accusations or gone to prison on such charges after his term was over.In recent weeks, Mr. Roh acknowledged that a businessman who supported him had given more than $6 million to his wife and son and his brother’s son-in-law while he was in office, but he denied the payments were bribes. He said that he did not know about the transactions until he left office and that the money for his wife went to pay a debt.The news of Mr. Roh’s death came as a shock to the nation, which, unlike Japan, does not have a strong history of political leaders and other notables committing suicide to take responsibility for real or alleged offenses.On Saturday, villagers from Bongha paid tribute to Mr. Roh, lining up along a road, crying, as his coffin passed by. By evening, hundreds of mourners and supporters had converged in downtown Seoul, laying long-stemmed white chrysanthemums  at a makeshift altar.A self-educated lawyer, Mr. Roh first made his mark by defending student and labor activists who opposed military dictators and their cronies in industry. He began to gain prominence in the late 1980s when, as a neophyte lawmaker, he threw his parliamentary nameplate at a military dictator, Chun Doo-hwan, and publicly berated corrupt but powerful tycoons, including Chung Ju-yung, the founder of the Hyundai conglomerate and a mentor of Mr. Lee, a former Hyundai executive.“More than any politician, Mr. Roh challenged the establishment and taboos in South Korea, such as when he declared, ‘What’s wrong with being anti-American?’ ” said Kang Won-taek, a political scientist at Soongsil University in Seoul.Mr. Roh’s strong stands as president proved divisive. His efforts to free South Korea from its traditional dependence on Washington in its diplomacy unsettled many people, as did his policy of sending billions of dollars of unconditional aid to North Korea.His combative rhetoric and distaste for compromise led to endless bickering with his conservative critics.“There was not a single quiet day while he was in office,” said Choi Jin, the director of the Institute of Presidential Leadership. “Throughout his life, he always made extreme choices, playing an all-or-nothing game. His suicide was the last explosion in his fiery and volcanic career.”Interviews with several former aides of Mr. Roh painted a picture of a once proud leader growing despondent in retirement as the country’s conservative media hounded his family and prosecutors began asking questions about their finances.“It must have been unbearably difficult for him to see his reputation tarnished by the excessive probe by prosecutors and to see his entire legacy disparaged in the media,” said Kim Jong-sup, a former presidential spokesman.Mr. Roh once said his biggest achievement was his 2002 election, said Oh Young-jin, a former spokesman. In this country’s modern history, marred by dictatorships, corruption and “boss politics,” Mr. Roh won the presidency without a regional support base, a political faction or strong ties with conglomerates.He swept into power on a wave of nationalistic — and sometimes anti-American — sentiments among young voters. During his campaign, he declared that he would be the “first South Korean leader not to kowtow to the Americans.” But he also came under fire from many of his former supporters, including labor unions, when he signed a free-trade agreement with Washington.Once in office, Mr. Roh worked hard to make the presidency less imperial, thrilling young and liberal voters chafing at the country’s strict social hierarchy. He also tried to break collusive ties between politics and big businesses and tried to curtail the power of big and conservative newspapers.Older and conservative voters detested his maverick ways, with many people accusing him of being coarse, amateurish and a threat to the alliance with the United States.Born into a family too poor to send him to college, Mr. Roh educated himself and passed the bar exam without having attended law school. In a society where status is often determined by which college a person attended, his success was lauded when he was popular but ridiculed during his later years in office, when he was accused of bungling the economy.Even in retirement, Mr. Roh inspired strong emotions. While the conservative newspapers kept up a drumbeat of criticism, busloads of supporters and tourists flocked to his village, turning him into something South Korea had never seen: a former president as tourist attraction.The accusations of corruption involving his family began to surface soon after Mr. Roh left office; under Korean law, he could not run for a second term.He had, in the past, shown a facility for dealing with political crises; he became the first South Korean president to be impeached in 2004 on accusations of violating election laws, but he was able to remain in office. This time, however, “he saw no way out,” according to Mr. Kang.In his last posting on his Web site, on April 22, Mr. Roh said he could “no longer symbolize the values” he once championed and told his supporters to “discard” him. On April 30, he traveled to Seoul to face prosecutors’ questions while the news media used helicopters to follow him and broadcast the motorcade’s trip. Such treatment is unusual in South Korea and was considered a staggering humiliation.“Many people suffered too much because of me,” Mr. Roh said in his suicide note. “I would be a burden for them for the rest of my life.”