http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/28/arts/28dans.html
Boris Charmatz - Dance - Review - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
Oct. 28, 2006
3904
Boris Charmatz is one fascinating dancer and choreographer, but he has not appeared in New York for five years. So it might have seemed disappointing that when he finally did venture over here from his native France, he brought not a new work but his oldest, a duet he choreographed with a boyhood friend, Dimitri Chamblas, in 1993. But their piece, “À Bras le Corps,” which continues through tonight at St. Mark’s Church, is not merely a relic of the past.Mr. Charmatz stayed longer with his ballet training and still dances and makes dances, while Mr. Chamblas’s interests gradually diverged toward film; he now works for a French advertising film company. The two decided long ago to keep intact the basic choreography of “À Bras le Corps” and to perform it periodically all their lives, letting it evolve in mood and atmosphere as they matured.The enigmatic title is translated as “total embrace” in its news release but has also been rendered as “to take strongly” and “to seize boldly,” with hints of attacking a problem and, the one I like, as a play on “à bas le corps,” or “down with the body.”It consists of the two men barefoot and dressed in white, like martial arts practitioners, interacting in a small rectangle surrounded by the audience. Mr. Charmatz is the bearded one, Mr. Chamblas the swarthily handsome, slightly out-of-shape one. The stark lighting design is by Renaud Lapperousaz.The performance is like a wrestling match, full of macho bravado and competition and tender camaraderie. The two roll and leap, sometimes together and sometimes apart but almost always in sync; for all its seemingly roughhouse spontaneity, the moves have been carefully rehearsed.Choreographic elements recur — one man lifting the other horizontally and flipping him, or walking on the other’s back. There’s an amusing ballet contest, with each doing air turns and landing in a pose designed to milk a ballet audience’s applause. At another point on Thursday Mr. Charmatz tore off an audience member’s shoe (mine, as it happened) and hurled it across the room, nearly beaning a woman on the other side; he also grabbed programs from viewers’ hands and scattered them about.Mostly the two men dance to silence, punctuated by their breathing and occasional expostulations. Then there are loud and fierce snatches of Paganini solo violin caprices, as recorded by Itzhak Perlman, which jack up the intensity level.A mere half-hour long, this is a gripping and appealing work, full of sexy charm beneath the rigorous surface. In 1993, it served as a shock to a theatricalized French dance world. By now, Mr. Charmatz has said, the actual choreography no longer particularly interests him. But as an evolutionary performance process, and a symbol of a friendship, it’s as fresh as ever.That said, it would still be nice for New York to see some of Mr. Charmatz’s more recent experiments.