http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/16/us/politics/donald-trump-transition.html
Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner Will Not Seek Security Clearances, Sources Say - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,Abe  Shinzo,Biden  Joseph R Jr,Graham  Lindsey,Kaine  Timothy M,Sessions  Jefferson B III,Van Hollen  Christopher Jr,Reid  Harry,Pence  Mike
Nov. 16, 2016
8075
No security clearance is coming for Ivanka Trump or Jared Kushner in a Donald J. Trump transition or administration, sources say, as Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York meets with the president-elect.Neither Ivanka Trump, President-elect Donald J. Trump’s daughter, nor her husband, Jared Kushner, has applied for a security clearance, nor do they intend to, according to two people close to the Trump transition.In the long back-and-forth over whether Mr. Trump’s family would get top-secret security clearances, Kellyanne Conway seemed to tip her hand on Wednesday — at least regarding Mr. Kushner.“It’s appropriate for whoever’s going to get the presidential daily briefing to have a security clearance,” Ms. Conway, Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, said. “It’s not just appropriate, necessary.”But transition officials said Mr. Kushner had not sat in any security briefings and had no plans to.Mr. Kushner — the son of a New Jersey developer and convicted criminal, and the owner of the newspaper The New York Observer — has no background in national security.Meeting with the news media in the lobby of Trump Tower, Ms. Conway on Wednesday denied, well, everything.Campaign in disarray? “I just don’t see it that way. It’s just not that way.”Did the president-elect mislead reporters on Tuesday night when he slipped out for dinner at the “21” Club?“No. He was just having dinner with his family.”Will Mr. Trump hold a news conference?“Shortly, I would say. Sometime soon.”It’s been just over a week since the election, and Mr. Trump has made only two appointments.“You don’t form a federal government overnight, and these are very serious issues, very serious appointments, very serious considerations.A U.S. Chamber of Commerce board meeting was jolted Wednesday morning by a visit from Vice President-elect Mike Pence, whose running mate crossed swords with the business group over trade agreements during the campaign.But if Big Business was hoping for an olive branch, Mr. Pence was not forthcoming. Mr. Pence appeared at 10 a.m. and told the group of about 75 attendees that the administration’s focus would be on “economic growth,” according to one attendee, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss a private meeting.But there was one word he did not mention: trade.The Chamber is a vocal proponent of international trade agreements, especially the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the huge trade accord secured by President Obama and vilified by Mr. Trump.A new name emerged as a possible choice for secretary of state on Wednesday — Gov. Nikki R. Haley of South Carolina, a Republican who backed Senator Marco Rubio of Florida in the Republican primaries and who spoke against Mr. Trump’s incendiary language.Those close to Mr. Trump had mentioned Ms. Haley in passing during the vice-presidential hunt this year, but considered her damaged by her opposition to the nominee.Mr. Trump has told friends that he is keeping his own list of names for cabinet posts, and that they should pay little mind to what they read in the newspapers or see on television about transition planning.The on-again-off-again romance with Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, to be Treasury secretary seems to be back on, at least according to Maria Bartiromo of the Fox Business Network.Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York, in an hourlong session with President-elect Donald J. Trump — a man Mr. de Blasio once called uniquely unqualified for the presidency — cautioned Mr. Trump against large-scale deportations and what the mayor characterized as divisive language and policies that have heightened fears among New Yorkers.“The ball’s in his court,” Mr. de Blasio said outside Trump Tower in Manhattan, at a news conference Wednesday after the meeting. “People in the city and all over the country are looking to see what he’s going to do.”Citing a rise of anti-Semitism in the city, he added, “Part of why I think it’s so important to remind the president-elect and his team that there are deep fears and concerns out there is because the wrong messages can encourage hateful acts. So, I certainly made clear that I think sending a message of unity is crucial.”One of the items on the president-elect’s to-do list is to find someone to fill the Supreme Court seat vacated by the death of Antonin Scalia.To that end, Mr. Trump met on Wednesday with Leonard Leo, the executive vice president of the Federalist Society, a group that advocates a conservative and libertarian approach to the law. Mr. Leo said the president-elect seemed committed to picking someone who cares “very deeply about the rule of law and about the preservation of our Constitution.”“He’s looking for someone who is independent, courageous, smart, very high quality,” Mr. Leo told reporters, adding that Mr. Trump remained committed to choosing one of the 21 court prospects he circulated during the campaign.Mr. Leo said Mr. Trump had not revealed a timeline for announcing a pick for the court.The president-elect dined at the “21” Club in Manhattan on Tuesday night out of reporters’ earshot. But what did he say? He was promising a group of well-heeled patrons that he would lower their taxes.Some patrons laughed.Mr. Trump, who lives on Fifth Avenue, campaigned as a champion of the middle class.Steve Mnuchin, a member of the transition team executive committee and possible pick for Treasury secretary, fleshed out that agenda, telling reporters on Wednesday morning that he and Mr. Trump had “talked about taxes.”“I think the other thing — very big focus — is regulatory changes, looking at the creation of an infrastructure bank to fund infrastructure investments,” he said. “So, there’s a lot of things to do, and I’d say the economic priorities are clearly taxes, regulatory, trade and infrastructure.”Chinese climate change negotiators in Marrakesh, Morocco, delivered a response to Mr. Trump’s 2012 Twitter post that claimed:Liu Zhenmin, China’s deputy minister of foreign affairs and lead negotiator at this United Nations summit meeting, told reporters, “Climate change is not, as rumored, a hoax created by the Chinese.”“If you look at the history of climate change negotiations, it was initiated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change with the support of Republicans in both the Reagan and Bush administrations in the late ’80s and early ’90s,” Mr. Liu added. “So I hope that Republicans will continue to support this process.”The Marrakesh negotiations are a follow-up to the passage of last year’s Paris Agreement, committing nearly 200 countries to take action to curb global warming. President-elect Trump has slammed the deal and suggested that he would withdraw the United States from it.China is emerging in Mr. Trump’s wake as a new leader in efforts to curb global warming.“Whatever position the U.S. puts forth, China will continue to support the Paris agreement,” Mr. Liu said.