https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/29/garden/planting-a-clock-that-tracks-hours-by-flowers.html
Planting a Clock That Tracks Hours by Flowers - The New York Times
Flowers and Plants,Watches and Clocks,Gardens and Gardening
Jan. 28, 2015
8989
The professionals said it could not be done. They had never tried it, and they didn’t know any public garden that had tried it, and they wouldn’t recommend anyone else give it a try.This was not the response I expected when I called a few plant people and asked how to design a type of flower bed that has been around since the mid-18th century. It’s called a Horologium Florae: a flower clock. (No relation to the Apple Watch.)“Please don’t show this to my bosses,” said Marc Hachadourian, the director of the Nolen Greenhouses, a 43,000-square-foot grow facility at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx. What Mr. Hachadourian, 41, meant was, Don’t give management any ideas.He was joking. Mostly. Because once you hear it, the idea behind the flower clock is irresistible. First, identify a selection of a few dozen flowers that open and close at regular hours. They can be old friends like lilies, marigolds and primroses. Next, plant them in an organized fashion — perhaps in the segmented shape of a dial or clock face.At this point, clock-watchers may want to skip ahead to the useful flowering timetable in the second half of this article. The seeds and plants for growing a flower clock may already be tick-tick-ticking in the stack of garden catalogs on the mail table.Here’s how the timepiece works. During a stroll in the summer garden, you notice that the sow thistle petals are open while the adjacent pumpkin blossoms remain shut. The first plant, according to your records, blooms reliably at 5 a.m.; the second at 6 a.m.Who needs a watch when the flowers know the time?Like so many botanical concepts, the flower clock originated with the Swedish ur-taxonomist Carl Linnaeus, in his 1751 treatise “Philosophia Botanica.” Based on field observations, he divided flowers into three categories. The meteorici open and close with the weather. The tropici follow the changing hours of daylight. And the aequinoctales, Linnaeus wrote, “open precisely at a certain hour of the day and generally shut up every day at a determinate hour.”From this third category, the aequinoctales, Linnaeus compiled a list of a few dozen plants to open and close with the hours: hawkweed, garden lettuce, marigold, day lily. Horticulture meets horology.It seems unlikely that he ever planted one himself, said Gina Douglas, the honorary archivist at the Linnean Society of London. (Is there a dishonorable archivist — the equivalent of a naughty librarian?) It would be better, Ms. Douglas wrote in an email, to think of the flower clock as a method for using the flora in the local landscape to estimate the time.Over the years, the Linnean Society has received regular inquiries about the flower clock and how to make one. For the most part, Ms. Douglas said, nothing seemed to come of it. In 2008, a public art group in Vancouver, British Columbia, started a wiki to collect flowering observations. But to date, the Vancouver Flower Clock Project hasn’t produced a bumper crop of data.The challenges of urban botanizing can be gleaned from a 9 p.m. post about the dandelion (Taraxacum officinale): “Looked out bus window, Petals closed. Warm evening after a clear warm summer day. There is a group of teenage girls trying to set the seeding blooms on fire with their lighter.”­•Or maybe the problem with the flower clock is that it doesn’t work. Linnaeus, for a start, made many of his observations in the endless summer daylight of Uppsala, at about 60 degrees north. At more reasonable latitudes (New York lies around 40.5 degrees north), these same flowers typically unfold later in the day.Some of Linnaeus’s choices can be seen growing at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, said Melanie Sifton, 39, the garden’s vice president for horticulture. But they’re not prize specimens in the collection; they’re roadside weeds and volunteers. “Some Northern European wildflowers are our weeds,” Ms. Sifton said.European bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), for example, may open like the chiming of a clock at 5 a.m. But, Ms. Sifton said: “No gardener wants that weed. It has roots that go down to hell.”An even greater barrier to creating a floral clock is conceptual: The aequinoctales, those fixed-hour blooms, do not exist. Or not precisely as Linnaeus described them, anyway. We are wandering here from the Nordic wildflower meadow to the university laboratory and the study of photoperiodism. This is the relationship between day length and plant behavior.More than a century of research suggests that a flower’s circadian clock is filled with complications. Light is a dominant factor in opening and closing. These cues include the changing length of dark and light periods, the intensity of light, even the wavelength.Temperature is another influence, and to a lesser extent so is humidity. Electric fields may play a role in flowering. Apparently a blossom carries a negative charge, while an insect in flight holds a positive charge.It’s hard to put one over on a dandelion.All that said, some plants do show endogenous rhythms, or an internal clock. Selenicereus grandiflorus, a night-blooming cactus, will continue to open at the same hour, even after you’ve brought it inside and exposed it to darkness during the daytime and light at night. (Correction: it will for a while, at least.) A field marigold moved from the garden to a dark room will still open its flowers on a 24-hour cycle. (Again, for a spell.)A plant seems to practice a form of federalism: the flower obeys its own governor. A light shined on just the leaves apparently will not change the rhythm of the flower buds.These mystifying habits have something to do with pollination. The white petals on a night-blooming cactus, Ms. Sifton said, attract not the morning bee but a night flyer, the sphinx moth. At daybreak, the flowers shut to protect pollen and husband resources.Tracing the flower’s genetic pathways will get you only so far. A thorough 2003 review of floral research, published in the “Journal of Experimental Botany,” includes the following thought: “It may be noted, in this scientific context, that flower opening has inspired many artists and seems of special emotional value to people.”Hey, it’s a working hypothesis. Support for this claim rests in the sentimental British garden journals of the early 19th century, where the flower clock inspired some marvelously bad poetry:Broad o’er its imbricated cup,The goat’s-beard spreads its golden rays,But shuts its cautious petals up,Retreating from the noontide blaze.The verse never does find a workable rhyme for Hieracium (a perennial in the sunflower family). But the poetry of the flower clock continues to grip the imagination. A few days ago, for instance, my partner texted me an offhand reference to the flower clock in her latest book-club novel, “Arcadia” (Voice, 2012), by Lauren Groff.A few weeks earlier, I’d stumbled upon a reference in the brand new novel “Glow” (Knopf), by the literary prestidigitator Ned Beauman. The plot involves pirate radio, a paid dog-walker with a nonconforming sleep cycle, Burmese mining concessions and a poppylike psychoactive plant called “glo,” which blooms under 24-hour lights. You can probably guess how it all turns out.When I reached him by Skype in London, Mr. Beauman, 29, confessed to a florid ignorance of practical gardening. “Actually, what I like about it is it’s so impractical,” he said of Linnaeus’s invention. “One imagines someone waking up in the middle of the night, putting on their dressing gown and then bending over in the garden and smelling the nipplewort and then saying, ‘Wow, it’s late.’ And then going back inside.”Three authors do not make a trend. But one of these, the science writer Joshua Foer (“Moonwalking With Einstein”), did his best to cultivate one. A few years ago, Mr. Foer, 32, assembled a collection of seeds and sold out some 200 kits through Quarterly Co., a purveyor of curated packages.Mr. Foer discovered the Horologium Florae while compiling an article for the magazine Cabinet, titled “A Minor History of Time Without Clocks.” He cited, for example, a “German woodsman’s” plan for an “ornithological clock,” following the hourly birdsong of the green chaffinch (1 to 2 a.m.), the black cap (2 to 3:30 a.m.), the hedge sparrow (2:30 to 3 a.m.), etc.Seed packets seemed easier to ship than songbirds. “I myself can’t speak to whether this will work or not,” Mr. Foer said over the phone from his new house in Brookline Village, Mass. “I don’t have a memory of anybody writing me and saying they actually made this successfully.”­•I finally found the working innersprings for an American flower clock in a place where I often go for personal guidance: the “Transactions of the Annual Meetings of the Kansas Academy of Science.” (The publication is still in print, if you’re looking for “Observations of the Nine-Banded Armadillo in Northeastern and Central Kansas.”) There, in 1890, a botanist named B. B. Smyth published a plant list based on prairie-flower studies.Was it reliable chronometry or more doggerel? Smyth’s obituary recounts that after a single year of college (“Michigan Normal at Ypsilanti”), he became an authority on mathematics, geology and botany. This makes him either a polymath or a prairie charlatan in the mold of the traveling professor from “The Wizard of Oz.”Ms. Sifton, from the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, liked the American tilt of the professor’s list. “He’s got a lot of cacti here,” she said, which she also grows in Brooklyn.Then I brought in a ringer: Claudia West, a landscape designer and ecologist for the perennial plant company North Creek Nurseries. Ms. West, 31, had the advantage of growing up on a family nursery in Germany, where Linnaean flower clocks (Blumenuhrs) are something of a cultural tradition, and occasionally pop up in parks.You probably wouldn’t want to use this flower clock to catch the 6:52 a.m. Metro-North from Scarsdale. But then, Mr. Hachadourian said: “The way a gardener looks at time is very different. You look at growing seasons: spring and fall. How long it takes a vegetable to reach maturity. Whether you have two more hours after dark to finish weeding. I don’t think of horticulturists as clock-watchers.”Put another way, who stands outside for hours, gazing at a starflower instead of a Samsung Galaxy? When you’re stalking a hawkweed at daybreak, time is an afterthought.•The flower clocks below follow Linnaeus’s original scheme and the suggestions of modern horticulturists for Eastern Standard Time. For Eastern Daylight Time, set the flowers forward one hour.3 to 5 a.m.Linnaean Time (opening): Tragopogon pratensis (yellow goatsbeard or Jack-go-to-bed-at-noon). This aster-family weed (or nonnative wildflower, if you prefer) looks like a dandelion’s big brother. Marc Hachadourian, from the New York Botanical Garden, said, “People see that on the side of the road and they say, ‘Look at the size of that seed head!' ”Eastern Standard Time (opening): Ipomoea spp. (morning glory). Melanie Sifton, from the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, favors a dark pink Japanese cultivar called Chocolate. (Note: “The flowers are actually poisonous!” she said.)Sources: Goatsbeard: look for it in a ditch along the interstate. Ipomoea nil Chocolate: Baker Creek Heirloom Seeds, rareseeds.com.•6 to 8 a.m.Linnaean Time (opening): Hieracium umbellatum (Canadian hawkweed). Ms. Sifton described this 1- to 4-foot-tall wildflower as “a little like a smaller, less dense sunflower.”Eastern Standard Time (opening): Callirhoe involucrata (purple poppy mallow). The purple poppy mallow, a native perennial, forms a kind of matting ground cover, said Claudia West, of North Creek Nurseries. The flowers, she said, are “the hottest pink you can imagine.”Sources: Canadian hawkweed and purple poppy mallow: Prairie Moon Nursery, 866-417-8156, prairiemoon.com.•9 to 11 a.m.Linnaean Time (closing): Lactuca sativa (garden lettuce). Once lettuce bolts — that is, flowers — the leaves become bitter. “How many people would even know or recognize what a lettuce flower looks like?” Ms. Sifton said. For the leaves, at least, the century-old children’s garden often chooses Black-Seeded Simpson and Deer Tongue.Eastern Standard Time (opening): Hibiscus moscheutos (swamp rose mallow). The crenellated flowers of this native open and wither in a single day. But at four inches across, and bright white, they’re hard to miss. Ms. West sometimes spots the head-high plants growing around brackish waters in Maryland.Sources: Lettuce (Black Seeded Simpson, Deer Tongue and some 150 other varieties): Johnny’s Selected Seeds, 877-564-6697, johnnyseeds.com. Hibiscus moscheutos: J. L. Hudson, Seedsman, jlhudsonseeds.net.•Noon to 2 p.m.Linnaean Time (closing): Sonchus palustris (marsh sow thistle). A weedy aster from north of the border that could pass for a dandelion.Eastern Standard Time (opening): Phemeranthus teretifolius (quill fameflower). This Appalachian native takes its name, “phemeranthus,” from the ephemerality of its flower. Each bloom lasts but a day. That said, a single succulent may open 100 flowers. An almost rootless rock-dweller in the wild, the quill fameflower is a “fantastic plant for green roofs,” Ms. West said. The very similar Phemeranthus calycinus is easier to find in nurseries.Sources: Sonchus palustris: a ditch by the side of the road — in Ontario. Phemeranthus teretifolius: Alplains Seed Catalog, alplains.com.•3 to 5 p.m.Linnaean Time (closing): Leontodon hispidus (rough hawkbit) or L. autumnale (autumn hawkbit). O.K., this one must be the classic dandelion, right? Wrong again. The hawkbits (naturalized in New York) have small bracts on the stem!Eastern Standard Time (opening): Escobaria vivipara (spinystar). The obvious choice here is Mirabilis jalapa, the common four-o’clock. But the Kansas botanist B. B. Smyth also recommended a Great Plains and Western pincushion cactus for his 1890 flower clock. Like a lazy sales clerk, the magenta flower opens sometime after 2 p.m. and closes up shop around 5 p.m. It reopens the next afternoon.Sources: Leontodon spp.: Jelitto Perennial Seeds, 502-895-0807, jelitto.com. Spinystar (in a 2.5-inch pot): High Country Gardens, 800-925-9387, highcountrygardens.com.•6 to 8 p.m.Linnaean Time (closing): Nymphaea alba (European white waterlily). It appears your flower clock will need a pond, or at least a decent fountain. Linnaeus actually put the closing time in the 5 o’clock hour. That’s fine. Though botanists have long studied waterlilies for their daily flowering routine, Mr. Hachadourian questioned whether they actually close like clockwork.Eastern Standard Time (opening): Oenothera fruticosa (sundrops or narrowleaf evening primrose). Ms. West noted that this native “will grow on just about any soil,” including dry urban sites. “The only concern is that it does like to spread from seed.” You’ve been warned. The brilliant yellow flowers should wilt before sunrise.Sources: Waterlily (Nymphaea odorata, a more available native American relative): Shooting Star Nursery, 866-405-7979, shootingstarnursery.com. Oenothera fruticosa seed: Specialty Perennials, 952-432-8673, hardyplants.com. Or Oenothera fruticosa Fireworks plant: Plant Delights Nursery, 919-772-4794, plantdelights.com.•9 to 11 p.m.Linnaean Time: Sleep. Linnaeus’s 1751 flower clock ends at 8 p.m. Ms. Sifton commented: “He didn’t have any plants that would bloom in the afternoon or evening. I suppose Northern European plants don’t really behave that way.”Eastern Standard Time (opening): Ipomoea alba (moonflower). Professor Smyth, in Kansas, observed that this moth-pollinated vine blooms at 9 p.m. Seems a little late. Whenever it happens to occur, Ms. Sifton said, the five-inch-diameter moonflower puts on a show. In less than a minute, “You can see it open right before your eyes.”Sources: Ipomoea alba: Swallowtail Garden Seeds, 877-489-7333, swallowtailgardenseeds.com.•Midnight to 2 a.m.Eastern Standard Time (closing): Selenicereus grandiflorus (queen of the night). This queen of the night blooms just once a year (though over a series of days). The extravagant white flower — up to a foot in diameter – opens at night. And then it flops over before morning. As a tropical cactus, the queen of the night is more of a houseplant in the north. But if you’re going to get up to see the morning glories open at 4 a.m., you should be home in bed.Source: Selenicereus grandiflorus: Trade Winds Fruit, tradewindsfruit.com.