http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/12/fashion/alexander-wang-victoria-beckham-tommy-hilfiger-new-york-fashion-week.html
Hashtag Fashion on the Rise - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,New York Fashion Week,Akris (Fashion Label),Monse (Fashion Label),Beckham  Victoria,Hilfiger  Tommy,Wang  Alexander (1983- ),Spring Fashion Week 2017
Sept. 11, 2016
9350
We live in a time of bifurcation and oppositions: Trump vs. Clinton, the one percent vs. the 99 percent, globalism vs. isolationism. So it shouldn’t be a surprise to any of us, really, that fashion is right on trend. There’s a rift opening in New York Fashion Week, with big blowout extravaganzas facing off against quieter, more traditional collections; hashtag hoo-has against analogue outreach. It’s an either-or moment.On Friday night Tommy Hilfiger invited a few thousand people (plus Taylor Swift) to the “Tommy Pier” at the South Street Seaport for #TOMMYNOW, where he recreated a funfair complete with Ferris wheel, tornado ride, lobster rolls, temporary tattoo parlor and pop-up digital kiosks, the better to frame his see-now, buy-now fall collection, made in collaboration with the model and social media magnet Gigi Hadid.Then, on Saturday, Alexander Wang invited another capacity crowd (plus Madonna) to another pier and threw a #Wangfest after his Wang show to celebrate his collaboration with Adidas, complete with Slurpee truck, pop-up McDonald’s, 7-Eleven, the South Korean rapper CL and Alexander Wang x Adidas stuff to buy (T-shirts and hoodies, $80 to $200).Fast food! Fast fashion! Fun for all! At least in theory. But what of the clothes? They were buried under an avalanche of Instagram moments.Which was probably a good thing for Tommy and Gigi’s banal parade of nautical greatcoats and tight leathers, varsity knits and frayed denim shorts, thigh-highs and velour sweats, all of it given at least a momentary glow by the carny lights. But too bad, really, for Alexander Wang’s counterintuitive mash-up of surfswear and men’s wear and slip dresses. Athlingerie. Who knew?Bathrobe furs came over neon bras and tailored gray shorts, and C-suite shirting was cut into bloomers and crop tops, ribbons bisecting the naked waist. Oh, and there were shrunken lacy rashguard cocktail minis and wide cropped khakis, leather biker shorts and rough-weft sequined dresses made with the throwaway carelessness of a T-shirt.Not that you had any leisure, really, to realize how weirdly compelling they were, in their pointed commentary on caste and wardrobe. Mr. Wang, who famously runs down the runway in a burst of exuberance at the end of every show, produces some pretty angry clothes, a contrast that bears thinking about. (Mr. Hilfiger’s clothes, on the other hand, require absolutely no thought at all.) But he doesn’t make it easy.The models powered by, and then it was party time. Get out your cellphones and start posting.Or maybe not. Because inland from the piers and in the light of day, something else was going on. Special event hashtags and Snapchat filters be damned.Akris, the Swiss label beloved of the high-powered executive, which normally shows in Paris, came to Lever House on Park Avenue, the landmark midcentury International Style building, the better to show its sleek and understated separates in a sleek and understated space (actually an unoccupied floor).Inspired by the Cuban artist Carmen Herrera, who will have a retrospective at the Whitney Museum starting Friday, the designer Albert Kriemler imbued long-line jackets and flared trousers with a purist geometry, contrasting beige and cream with emerald green, tangerine and periwinkle. Shirtdresses and tailored shorts suits came in butter-soft leather and laser-cut lace, and evening gowns had an arty, unstructured air.The linearity on the runway was echoed by the linearity of the office buildings all around, and together it made a lot of sense (well, apart from some weird dangly bits at the waist of dresses that floated with movement but flopped when still).Meanwhile, at Monse, Fernando Garcia and Laura Kim, who were recently named creative directors of Oscar de la Renta, offered a mix of torqued men’s wear — pinstripes and crisp white shirts de-and-reconstructed into cold shoulder tops (shoulders are shaping up to be something of an erogenous zone) and wide, cropped trousers — before segueing into scarf and awning stripes and some white knits with sequins and paillettes creeping up from the hem like a fungus, or melting down a gown from a transparent chiffon shoulder. It sounds weird but looked good. There’s a lot of noise around this label at the moment, but the designers kept their own more indulgent impulses in check.And Victoria Beckham ranged further afield from her constricted beginnings, loosening up and letting go, taking serious materials very unseriously indeed. Velvets were crushed and satin-washed, lace smocked and papery leather printed with roses. The silhouette was still skinny but very slouchy. It had a tactile appeal.But what it did not have was a party.Does it matter? It’s a real debate. On the one hand, in this white-noise-filled-short-attention-span world, you need to create as much hubbub as possible in as short a time as possible to catch anyone’s eye. On the other, said hubbub detracts from and overshadows the clothes, and being forced to look a little closer, spend a little time, is part of playing the long game. They are both valid positions.Which may be frustrating and inconclusive, but then, so is our current reality. And that means designers are actually doing their jobs.