http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/17/world/asia/17afghan.html
Afghanistan’s President Moves to Bolster Bid for Re-election - The New York Times
Afghanistan,Elections,Karzai  Hamid
Aug. 16, 2009
440
KABUL, Afghanistan — President Hamid Karzai moved to strengthen his chances of re-election on Sunday, just four days before the voting, by appearing in a live televised debate with two of his opponents and allowing an Uzbek warlord to return to Afghanistan to rally support.His security chiefs also announced that the Taliban would allow more polling stations to be open in the south, Mr. Karzai’s stronghold.The warlord, Abdul Rashid Dostum, the Uzbek commander whose men are accused of killing hundreds of Taliban prisoners of war in 2001, arrived in Afghanistan from exile in Turkey on Sunday evening, said Sardar Mohammad Rahman Oghli, a member of Parliament who is an ethnic Uzbek. Mr. Dostum’s return is expected to raise ethnic Uzbek support for Mr. Karzai, even though his reputation may put off some voters.Afghanistan’s intelligence chief, Amrullah Saleh, said Sunday that hundreds of Taliban have agreed to cede ground in different areas to allow presidential and provincial elections to go ahead unhindered, despite their campaign of threats and bombs.The agreements, mostly negotiated through elders in specific communities, will allow the Afghan police and army into areas to provide security for election officials and voters at polling centers, he said. It was not clear how many areas are involved, and election officials have said that hundreds of polling places will not be able to open because of a lack of security.But Mr. Saleh said Taliban groups were under pressure from government security forces as well as from the communities to allow elections to proceed. The decision of some groups to allow elections to take place was also an indication that the Taliban leadership did not have control of its commanders, he said.“These hundreds of Taliban who agree to back off and let the polling centers open and let the Afghan National Army at least come over, shows that the cohesion in the command of the Taliban is broken,” Mr. Saleh said.Afghan and American forces have retaken control of two districts in recent military operations, Interior Minister Mohammad Hanif Atmar said Sunday. Eight of Afghanistan’s 364 districts remain wholly under Taliban control and will not be able to hold elections, he said.But the government has also been pursuing a flexible approach in places. “This diplomatic effort and these softer approaches and outreach allow us not to rely on force alone but also to exploit other ways and be more pragmatic,” Mr. Saleh said.“We have contributed significantly to increasing the number of election centers,” he said, adding that the mediation efforts had taken place in a lot of provinces, “everywhere where you think they have a presence.” Security officials usually describe the Taliban as having influence in 45 percent of the country.Mr. Saleh joined the defense and interior ministers at a news conference in the capital to lay out their security plans for the elections and urge the population not to be deterred by the threat of violence, a day after Kabul suffered a car bombing that left 7 dead and 91 wounded.Minister of Defense Abdul Rahim Wardak called for a day of peace on Thursday, the day of elections, and said the Afghan security forces would not mount any offensive operations that day.In the southern city of Kandahar on Sunday, insurgents fired three rockets near a stadium as thousands gathered at a rally to support Mr. Karzai’s re-election bid.Mr. Karzai did not attend the rally, but the rockets landed close by the stadium, killing a woman in her home and wounding four other people, the director of the city hospital, Muhammad Daoud Farahi, said.The president, who is the front-runner in polls, appeared in the televised debate Sunday evening alongside two other prominent candidates, legislator Ramazan Bashardost and the former finance minister Ashraf Ghani. The debate was a sedate affair, but a first for the country as the president defended his record before two rivals.His main challenger, Abdullah Abdullah, declined to attend. Mr. Abdullah took part in an earlier debate with Mr. Ghani, which Mr. Karzai had declined to attend.Mr. Karzai defended his seven-year record, saying that he had always acted in the national interest, and that the general situation in Afghanistan had improved during his tenure.But his opponents highlighted the widespread insecurity, corruption and poor management that have all increased under Mr. Karzai’s government. And they took swipes at him, saying that Afghans did not want a president who hid behind bodyguards and armored cars.