http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/20/world/asia/philippines-gloria-arroyo-corruption-dismissed.html
Philippines Clears Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, Ex-President, of Graft Charges - The New York Times
Arroyo  Gloria Macapagal,Philippines,Corruption (Institutional),Aquino  Benigno S III
July 19, 2016
8201
MANILA — The Supreme Court of the Philippines dismissed corruption charges on Tuesday against a former president, Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, and ordered her release from a Manila hospital where she has been detained since 2012. Her lawyer said she was likely to be freed on Wednesday.The court, voting 11 to 4, ruled that there was insufficient evidence to bring a case against Mrs. Arroyo in connection with the misuse of 366 million pesos in lottery funds during her administration, worth about $8.8 million at the time of her arrest.Lawyers for Mrs. Arroyo contended that prosecutors did not prove that the mishandled funds went to her. She had been charged with plunder, which disqualified her for bail, but her lawyers said a spinal problem made her eligible for humanitarian release as she awaited trial.Mrs. Arroyo, 69, is the daughter of a former president of the Philippines, Diosdado P. Macapagal. She attended Georgetown University at the same time as Bill Clinton, the former United States president, and was a popular senator before being elected vice president in 1998.In 2001, she assumed the presidency after the president at the time, Joseph Estrada, was ousted in the face of corruption allegations. In 2004, she was elected president and served in that post until 2010, when she left office and was elected to Congress. She was re-elected to Congress in May and has served while in detention.Mrs. Arroyo’s administration was often the subject of corruption accusations. In 2005, a recording of a phone conversation between Mrs. Arroyo and an election official, Virgilio Garcillano, known as Garci, appeared to indicate that she had conspired to rig the national elections in 2004. Part of the recording, in which she greets Mr. Garcillano with “Hello, Garci,” became a popular ringtone and was used on the horns of some of the colorful jeepneys that ferry commuters.After she was arrested, she claimed that she was a victim of political persecution by her successor, President Benigno S. Aquino III, who campaigned on the promise of rooting out corruption and jailing political leaders who plundered government coffers.In 2015, the United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention issued an opinion that in light of her medical problems, the refusal to grant bail to Mrs. Arroyo made her detention arbitrary and a violation of international law. The group also stated that Mrs. Arroyo should be compensated for the time spent detained and urged the Aquino administration to reconsider the decision.“It is my fervent hope that nobody else will suffer the persecution that had been levied on me through self-serving interpretation and implementation of the law,” Mrs. Arroyo said in a statement released on Tuesday. “And that the disregard of truth for which I was made to suffer be dealt with accordingly at the soonest possible time.”Mrs. Arroyo is also accused of tampering with the results of congressional elections in 2007, an offense that could result in a prison sentence of 40 years to life.Ferdinand Topacio, a lawyer for Mrs. Arroyo’s husband, said he expected that case to be dismissed as well.“With respect to the electoral case, that is pure and unadulterated 100 percent baloney,” he said.