https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/arts/television/emmy-awards-2017-samira-wiley-handmaids-tale.html
Emmy Awards 2017: Samira Wiley on ‘The Handmaid’s Tale’ and Its Political Resonance - The New York Times
Emmy Awards,The Handmaid's Tale (TV Program),Wiley  Samira (1987- ),Actors and Actresses,Hulu.com,Web-Original Programming,Art,Orange Is the New Black (TV Program)
July 13, 2017
3839
After breaking countless hearts as Poussey Washington in the fourth season of Netflix’s “Orange Is the New Black,” Samira Wiley captured an army of new ones as Moira, a valiant fighter of government oppression, on Hulu’s “The Handmaid’s Tale.”She also earned her first Emmy nomination, for supporting actress in a drama — a category in which she is pitted against her castmate Ann Dowd, who portrays the fearsome Aunt Lydia. (The show itself was also nominated for drama series, with Elisabeth Moss receiving a nod for lead actress and Alexis Bledel for guest actress.)In a phone call from a makeup chair in Los Angeles, where she was shooting a YouTube Red series, Ms. Wiley chatted about her latest role, its political impact and a love that still endures. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.[ Emmy Interviews: Samantha Bee | Millie Bobby Brown | Claire Foy | Samira Wiley | Evan Rachel Wood ]When last we spoke, about a year ago, your story line on “Orange” had come to a close. Did you know then that you would be playing Moira? I did not know about this show when I exited “Orange.” There were a few months there when I was out of a job and just happened to have the script cross my desk, as they say. By the story and also by the character, I felt like I could really bring something to her, and I would be devastated if anyone else was playing her, so I put my all into it. And to have this be the outcome is more than I could imagine.So that cloud had a silver lining. What is it about Moira that appealed to you?The main thing is her sense of self. She is someone who is never going to become complacent with the world she is living in. We see her become downtrodden and lose a little bit of herself, or we think that’s what’s happening. But she remains resilient and she is able to come out of that.Had you read “The Handmaid’s Tale” before being cast?I had not, but I immediately consumed it. I count myself lucky to have not had any preconceived notions. I was able to come to it fresh. I had some people tell me before that if I messed this up they were going to kill me. [laughs] We have such a huge fan base of Margaret Atwood and her work. She’s on the forefront of feminist work, and to come to it the way I did, I didn’t have added pressure on myself, which was nice.You’ve traded one large female ensemble cast for another. How is that?It’s hard to compare. “Orange” was my first experience in having my face in the public consciousness in a way that it never was before. And that series became my view of what Hollywood and that entertainment world was: women cast, women producers, women behind the camera and in front of the camera. Now I’ve gone to another show where that’s happening, so it’s sort of become my norm. And I’m really spoiled in that way, not having had the typical experience in the industry.The handmaid’s uniform — red robes and white bonnets — has become prevalent at women’s rights protests. What is your take on the infiltration of this symbol of oppression into real life?The way that it’s permeated the culture, I never thought that it would be quite like this. It’s showing me the impact that art can have on society. Art imitates life and life imitates art, and to be a part of the conversation of what’s happening in our world right now, I feel completely, exactly where I want to be with my art. I want to be making things that are relevant.How was it filming the show during this political environment?It’s a little bit scary, honestly. We knew that this story was relevant, we knew that it was timely, we knew that it was important for us to “get this right.” But as the elections happened in the middle of filming, I think we understood in a different way the responsibility that we had to tell the story with the utmost integrity, and to bring our all to it as an ensemble, led brilliantly by Elisabeth. She really set the bar and the rest of us were, I believe, able to meet her.Do people still come up to you on the street to talk about Poussey?Oh my gosh. Yeah, that’s the No. 1 thing people want to talk about, and I don’t have any feelings about that except for love. It shows how much she really touched people and that we were successful with the story we decided to tell. Poussey will probably always be a part of my legacy. And it’s so great to see that something you put yourself into is not just gone — that she’s there in every single breath.