http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/11/arts/television/damian-lewis-of-homeland-on-showtime.html
Damian Lewis of ‘Homeland’ on Showtime - The New York Times
Television,Showtime,Lewis  Damian,Homeland (TV Program)
Dec. 9, 2011
6504
This is a longer version of an interview that will run in the Arts & Leisure section.The Showtime counterterrorism thriller “Homeland” has been a breakout hit this fall, earning impressive ratings and raves from critics and the online multitudes who feverishly parse its twists and turns.But Damian Lewis, the British actor who plays the tormented Marine at the heart of the series, knows the good will could vanish next week if “Homeland” fails to deliver a satisfying conclusion to its first season.“Television audiences are ruthless — look what happened to ‘The Killing,’ ” he said, referring to the AMC drama that alienated many viewers with an ambiguous season-ending episode. How will the “Homeland” finale, scheduled for next Sunday, avoid such pitfalls?“It will give answers in an episodic way while leaving you on a cliffhanger, ready for next season,” Mr. Lewis said. “People need revelation, and then they need resolution.”The series was initially animated by the cat-and-mouse tension between Carrie Mathison, an unstable C.I.A. officer played by Claire Danes, and Mr. Lewis’s Sgt. Nicholas Brody, a former P.O.W. turned war hero who might also be an undercover jihadist. More broadly the show explores notions about identity and belief, Mr. Lewis said.“What are your values and what will you do to defend them?” he added.For Mr. Lewis, a London native and veteran of British dramas like the remake of “The Forsyte Saga,” “Homeland” offers another opportunity to dust off the near flawless American accent he brought to shows like HBO’s lauded “Band of Brothers” and the short-lived but well-regarded NBC series “Life.”While visiting New York recently he talked with Jeremy Egner about “Homeland” and life as a redheaded role model. Here are edited excerpts from that conversation.Q. Why do you think “Homeland” has gotten such a positive response?A. The simplistic answer is it’s a thriller, really well told. It’s different from a plot-driven thriller like “24,” which was a bit like crack TV — it kept you on the edge of your seat, but they didn’t spend a lot of time with the psychology of the characters. This takes its time and is a little more pensive. The fact that people are watching and responding to it shows that the anxiety perhaps hasn’t died away yet.Q. You’re a British actor living in London, how did you end up playing an American war hero on Showtime?A. I just got a phone call. “Band of Brothers” was my first time playing an American, and it was my first time to have that kind of exposure here and globally, because “Band of Brothers” became such a big deal for people. I’ve played Americans ever since.Q. You played one in “Life,” which people liked even though it only lasted two seasons. Is that why they thought of you for “Homeland”?A. An interesting insight into the ruthlessness of studio executives: I was having a conversation with Alex Gansa, a creator of “Homeland,” and I said, “So you guys must have seen ‘Life’ and liked me in it, right? That’s the most recent thing I’ve done over here.” And he went, “No, Damian. You actually nearly didn’t get the job because of ‘Life.’” Because I was the lead guy on a show that the people at Fox 21 [which produces “Homeland” for Showtime] didn’t consider to be a hit — it wasn’t “House” or whatever. And I went, “Right, well it was kind of a hit — people loved that show and it was honored by AFI.” And he said, “Two seasons. And you were the lead guy.”Q. So why did they pick you?A. It was this film, “Keane,” that was loved by one of the executive producers. That’s really why I was offered the role. It had nothing to do with “Life.”Q. You have the accent down. Do you think there’s also something about red hair that reads as American?A. It’s not a problem for you guys, anyway. In England we burnt redheads at the stake, because we thought they were witches. There are still young redheads in Britain getting ripped for having red hair. “Oy, Ginger!” I get letters from young redheads saying: “You’re a redheaded role model, and there are very few of you. There’s Boris Becker and you.” But Boris gets caught having sex with people in restaurants.Q. So now it’s just you.A. It’s down to me. And Eric Stoltz.Q. What did you know about the “Homeland” role in the beginning?A. I knew that my character was going to be someone who had found Allah and had become a Muslim, but wouldn’t necessarily have been radicalized and turned into a jihadist warrior. That his motivation for a violent act that he might try to commit toward the end of the season might come from somewhere else.Q. When you signed on to “Homeland,” what did you think about how the show aimed to present the various post-Sept. 11 themes?A. I had one stipulation when I accepted the role, which was that there would be no lazy, easy parallels drawn between violence and Islam. Because I felt that would be irresponsible. I know that the DNA of the thriller is paranoia and anxiety, and I knew they would be playing on audience fears. You have a U.S. Marine who prays to Allah and has become a Muslim, and there will be some people who make that leap: therefore he must be about to blow us all up. Which, of course, is ridiculous and ignorant, but for the sake of a good thriller you explore that idea. But I think you see that Brody is nurtured and nourished by his faith.Q. How did you prepare for the role?A. I investigated post-traumatic stress disorder. I’ve been to a unit where people are suffering from it, and I read a lot of literature. I looked at footage of soldiers in the combat zone. I found “Restrepo” to be unbelievably useful. And then I went to the London Central Mosque. They have a sort of exhibition describing Islam, and I was welcomed into the prayers. I was able to sit in the back and learn a little bit about the prayer ritual.Q. What was the trickiest thing about portraying Brody?A. It was finding a balance. It was knowing when to lend an air of menace and when to be a damaged returning soldier and maybe elicit some sympathy from the audience. In the end I found it was most useful to play whatever moment was in the script in a wholehearted and committed way, and just make the changes lighting quick and allow him to be mercurial.Q. But have you had a central motivating principle in mind from the beginning? Or is he just all reaction?A. His super-objective, if you like, is to wait for a call from Abu Nazir to instruct him in some way. But moment to moment, he has to deal with the unexpected difficulties of being a man suffering with post-traumatic stress disorder, of reintegrating into a society which is now eight years progressed from when he left it, with a woman he is no longer compatible with and children he is no longer connected to. With the real connection he finds with Carrie Mathison, the most dangerous person in his life. He has to negotiate all of these things whilst retaining a state of readiness to act as a solider in some way.Q. Your character has gotten close to the vice-president, who seems to be a target. Did you ever wonder if you were just making “Manchurian Candidate 2”?A. Initially, yeah — the parallels were drawn. But in “The Manchurian Candidate” the Laurence Harvey character is brainwashed. This is not that. Brody is a proactive force — he acts as a solider, but for emotional and personal reasons rather than for faith-based reasons. So he chooses to act; he’s not brainwashed into doing something. That was always an important distinction for me.Q. There are plenty of intense scenes in the show. Which were the hardest to film?A. It might seem like it would be the fun part of an actor’s job to take your clothes off and lie in bed with a beautiful woman, but they’re always nervy, clumsy affairs. Claire and I nearly smashed our front teeth out the first time.Q. The sex scenes with the wife, played by Morena Baccarin, were particularly fraught.A. The two scenes you’re talking about are, I hope, a distressing representation of what it’s like for a guy who’s been away for eight years coming back and trying to establish some sort of intimacy with his wife.Q. Why does the wife call him Brody?A. [Laughs] Morena’s been asking that all season. “Why don’t I call him Nick?” I’m a boarding-school-educated Brit so people have been calling me by my last name forever. So it doesn’t seem that weird to me. I think the writers see it as a term of endearment.Q. Initially “Homeland” revolved around the tension between you and Claire Danes’s character, but that aspect has cooled off. Were you afraid that the show would lose steam?A. I don’t think there will ever be any slackening of the intensity related to the threat either to homeland security or to Carrie’s well-being. It just might not come from Brody. That’s all I’m going to say. I’m just fighting to be in it as long as possible. [Laughs.]Q. Are you in next season?A. I can’t tell you that. I’m a guy who might blow himself up at the end of this season.