https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/25/world/asia/south-north-korea-us-missile-defense-thaad-china.html
South Korea Tells China Not to Intervene in Missile-Defense System Talks - The New York Times
South Korea,China,North Korea,Missiles and Missile Defense Systems,United States International Relations,Terminal High Altitude Area Defense,Kerry  John,International Relations,Park Geun-hye,Nuclear Tests,Nuclear Weapons,Qiu Guohong
Feb. 24, 2016
1601
SEOUL, South Korea —  Tensions between South Korea and China over how to deal with the North have flared into an unusually blunt diplomatic dispute, with Seoul telling Beijing on Wednesday not to meddle in its talks with the United States over the possible deployment of an American missile-defense system here.Jung Youn-kuk, a spokesman for President Park Geun-hye of South Korea, said Seoul’s decision to discuss the system, known as Thaad, which stands for Terminal High Altitude Area Defense, was based on its own need for “self-defense against North Korea’s growing nuclear and missile threats.”“This is a matter we will decide upon according to our own security and national interests,” Mr. Jung said Wednesday. “The Chinese had better recognize this point.”A senior official, speaking to reporters at the South Korean Foreign Ministry on the condition of anonymity, went further, advising China to “look into the root of the problem if it really wants to raise an issue with it” — a reference to the North’s pursuit of nuclear and ballistic missile technology and what South Koreans and Americans consider China’s failure to dissuade Pyongyang from that path.The angry retorts came a day after the Chinese ambassador to South Korea, Qiu Guohong, warned that the two countries’ relationship could be “destroyed in an instant” if Seoul allowed the Thaad system to be deployed on its soil.Beijing says the system would enable United States military radar to penetrate deeper into China, compromising its security.“The Thaad deployment would have a grave impact on China’s security interests,” Mr. Qiu was quoted as saying in a meeting with the leader of South Korea’s main opposition party. “The two nations have worked a lot to develop bilateral ties as they are today, but these efforts could be destroyed in an instant because of this one problem, and it would be difficult to restore the relations.” The opposition party, Minju, said Mr. Qiu had asked that his comments be made public.The United States has wanted to deploy the Thaad system in South Korea for years, and Seoul has long felt caught between its longtime ally and China, its leading trade partner, with which it has been trying to cultivate a closer relationship.But that equation changed after North Korea conducted its fourth nuclear test on Jan. 6 and followed up a month later with the launch of a long-range rocket. After China resisted efforts to place tougher sanctions on the North, South Korea formally announced that it was discussing the Thaad deployment with Washington.The floor leader of Ms. Park’s governing party in Parliament, Won Yoo-chul, called Mr. Qiu’s warning “blackmail” on Wednesday. “A real friendly relationship between South Korea and China can be maintained not by words, but by action,” he said, admonishing Beijing for not acting aggressively enough to rein in Pyongyang.Secretary of State John Kerry expressed a similar message in Washington during a joint news conference on Tuesday with Wang Yi, the visiting Chinese foreign minister. “We have said that if we can get to denuclearization, there’s no need to deploy Thaad,” Mr. Kerry said.The talks between South Korea and the United States have stoked old fears in China and Russia of an American antimissile shield stretching from Alaska to Southeast Asia.The Defense Ministry in Seoul says Thaad would provide a second, higher-altitude layer to the South’s own ballistic-missile interception abilities, which are based on Patriot missiles intended mainly to stop missiles at low altitudes.Gen. Curtis M. Scaparrotti, commander of the American forces in South Korea, and the South’s defense officials have said that it was critical for the allies to establish a “layered and interoperable” ballistic missile defense system.Yet many South Koreans, including the main opposition party, have reservations about the possible diplomatic and economic costs of deploying the system and about its effectiveness in defending the country against hundreds of short-range missiles from the North.A research institute in Seoul, the Peace Foundation, has argued that Thaad’s main purpose would be to protect the United States from intercontinental ballistic missiles from the North, should Pyongyang succeed in developing them. Such a missile “is not a direct threat to us,” it said.Cheong Seong-chang, a senior analyst at the Sejong Institute in South Korea, said a Thaad deployment would probably undermine the South’s strategic interests by pushing China closer to the North. China, which accounts for one-fourth of South Korea’s external trade, could retaliate by boycotting South Korean exports and discouraging visits by Chinese tourists, he warned.According to analysts, China thinks Thaad in South Korea would undermine its nuclear deterrence by giving the Americans the ability to quickly track launches of Chinese missiles. But defense officials here said that would not make much difference because the Americans already have a Thaad battery on Guam and operate powerful radar in the region, as well as satellites over China.Adm. Harry B. Harris Jr., commander of the United States Pacific Command, told a Senate Armed Services Committee hearing on Tuesday that it was “preposterous that China would try to wedge itself between South Korea and the United States for a missile system designed to defend Americans and Koreans on the peninsula.”Mr. Qiu, the Chinese ambassador, was quoted as telling the opposition politicians on Tuesday that Beijing trusted Seoul’s promise that any Thaad radar deployed here would be directed toward North Korea, and that it would not have enough range to cover China.