http://www.nytimes.com/2001/01/13/world/hong-kong-s-no-2-official-suddenly-quits-her-post.html
Hong Kong's No. 2 Official Suddenly Quits Her Post - The New York Times
HONG KONG,CHINA,CHAN  ANSON,SUSPENSIONS  DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT
Jan. 13, 2001
7824
The No. 2 official in Hong Kong's government, a recent target of criticism by the Chinese government, resigned unexpectedly today, 18 months before the end of her term.The official, Anson Chan, who had been appointed head of Hong Kong's civil service by the last British governor, was widely viewed as a symbol of this former colony's determination to retain a measure of autonomy under Chinese rule.Her sudden departure deprives Hong Kong of its most forceful advocate inside the government for civil liberties and the rule of law. Critics of the Chinese government said it raised fresh questions about Beijing's role in running Hong Kong.Mrs. Chan denied she was leaving because of pressure from Beijing. Last fall, the deputy prime minister of China, Qian Qichen, told Mrs. Chan that she should be more supportive of the chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa. Mr. Tung, a conservative shipping tycoon, was appointed by Beijing.''The decision is absolutely unrelated to my meeting with Qian,'' Mrs. Chan said. ''I decided to retire in July.''Mrs. Chan, 60, noted that she was originally scheduled to step down this month, but Mr. Tung had asked her to stay until 2002. With Hong Kong having bounced back from the Asian economic crisis, she said, she felt comfortable leaving early.''I have served over 38 years in the civil service,'' said Mrs. Chan, a regal woman who consistently draws high approval ratings in opinion polls. ''I would now like to spend rather more time with my family,''While Mrs. Chan was typically poised at a news conference today, her remarks left people here shaking their heads. Mr. Tung has said he plans a wholesale reform of Hong Kong's civil service -- precisely not the time for the self-avowed guardian of the administration to depart.''I wonder whether she just lost heart,'' said Christine Loh, a pro-democracy leader who gave up her seat in the legislature last year, saying that the council had no role in governing the new Hong Kong.''It is the end of an era,'' Ms. Loh continued. ''She was the link between the pre-1997 period and the post-1997 period.''Indeed, Mrs. Chan labored under the suspicion in some quarters that she was too close to the British. She was a protege of the last British governor, Chris Patten, who named her in 1993 as the first Chinese person to run the civil service.In the three and a half years since the handover, Mrs. Chan has sparred with Mr. Tung on issues like how to introduce fuller democracy to Hong Kong. Officials said Mrs. Chan strongly opposed Mr. Tung's decision to stick by one of his senior advisers after the adviser pressured the University of Hong Kong to stop conducting polls on the popularity of the chief executive.Mrs. Chan has also spoken out regularly in defense of ''one country, two systems,'' the formula under which Hong Kong is supposed to retain a separate political system for 50 years after 1997. People here say Mr. Tung represents ''one country,'' while Mrs. Chan stands for ''two systems.''Given their differences, analysts were surprised in 1999 when Mr. Tung asked Mrs. Chan to delay her retirement. At the news conference today, Mr. Tung hugged Mrs. Chan and said he had tried to talk her out of leaving.The Chinese Foreign Ministry issued a statement taking note of the resignation but declining to comment on it.Hong Kong's autonomy is being tested once again. The Falun Gong spiritual sect, outlawed in China but legal here, plans to hold a conference this weekend in a government-owned building. China tolerated a similar meeting in Hong Kong in late 1999, but local officials said Beijing's patience was wearing thin this time.Resignations have become a barometer of the changing atmosphere in Hong Kong. In November, Willy Wo-Lap Lam, a prominent columnist specializing in China, left the South China Morning Post after he was stripped of many of his duties. In 1999, the outspoken head of the government-run Radio Television Hong Kong, Cheung Man-yee, was abruptly transferred to Japan.To some observers, the reasons for Mrs. Chan's departure are not all that mysterious. She disagreed with her boss, said Albert Cheng, a popular radio talk-show host, and she is no longer in the political mainstream.''With or without her, the concept of 'two systems' is diminishing every day,'' Mr. Cheng said. ''One person cannot hold on to it.''