https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/smarter-living/what-to-cook-watch-listen-to-and-more-this-weekend.html
What to Cook, Watch, Listen To and More This Weekend - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 14, 2017
1048
We’re halfway through July already, and yet there’s still so much you can get out and do this summer.Where did all that time go? (You can find out, if you dare.)But you still have more than half of the summer left! There’s plenty of time to check off all the necessary and fun things you planned to do before the weather cools down.• Planning a getaway? Here are some tips for handling the busy summer travel scene.• Want to exercise more? Get outside.• We know: There are also those pesky summer chores to take care of before it’s too late.Let us know what you’d like to see in these weekend roundups, and sign up for our new Smarter Living newsletter to get our best advice on living a better, more fulfilling life.• Here’s what our Watching team thinks you should stream this weekend.• Or just tell Watching what you’re in the mood for and what streaming services you have — Netflix, Hulu, Amazon, etc. — and our database will serve up recommendations for you.• In the mood for a movie but don’t have a ton of time? Here are some of Netflix’s best movies under 90 minutes long.• Before “Game of Thrones” returns on Sunday, Watching is recapping the series’s previous seasons. Here’s Season 1, Season 2, Season 3, Season 4 and Season 5. You can also sign up for our Game of Thrones newsletter.• Read The New York Times review of “Lady Macbeth,” a break from the blockbusters that plunges a knife into the costume drama (and find all movie reviews here).• Listen to the songs that caught our music critics’ attention this week.• Alex Crossan, the 21-year-old Englishman who produces music as Mura Masa, released his first major-label album, a complex mesh of sounds and emotions.• On this week’s Popcast, Jon Caramanica, pop music critic for The Times, leads a conversation about hip-hop elders.• On the latest episode of Still Processing, hosts Wesley Morris and Jenna Wortham explore what Jay-Z and Beyoncé reveal about their marriage in their music.• Whether you’re looking for immersion or escapism, this week’s recommended reads have you covered.• These excellent books are new in paperback.• Two books and a novel help explain the opioid abuse crisis and show the havoc addiction can wreak in this week’s Newsbook.• Think you know everything about Jane Austen? Take this quiz to prove your knowledge of the literary legend.• Corn fritters are a classic. But have you considered clam, zucchini, squash or plum fritters? Have a fritter-filled meal.• Check out these filling vegetarian salads that can stand alone as a meal. Or, try these zucchini pancakes, zucchini Parmesan, or summer pasta with zucchini, ricotta and basil, all among our 10 best zucchini recipes.• A crowd pleaser, teriyaki-marinated flank steak, is perfect for a relaxed summer night.• Weekend project: Satisfy your sweet tooth with this chocolate caramel tart recipe.• Don’t let shoddy gear ruin your next beach day. Check out Sweethome’s beach gear guide to ensure you won’t be let down by an uncomfortable chair, floppy umbrella or ineffective cooler.• Not all sunscreens are created equal, with many failing to come through on their promised attributes. To make sure you’re protected, Sweethome found the best sunscreens.• From the best sand castle tools for kids to the top snorkels for adults, Wirecutter showcases the best beach and pool toys.• For the more adventurous and active beachgoers, check out Wirecutter’s favorite surfboards for beginners.• Take your pick of these 10 cultural highlights, including Punderdome, a truly punishing competition, Jazz in July at the 92nd Street Y and “Age of Empires: Chinese Art of the Qin and Han Dynasties” at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.• If you’re planning a peaceful getaway, consider Shelter Island.• The East Village cocktail bar Elsa has reopened in a bright and airy spot in Cobble Hill.• Check out our guides to theater, pop & rock music, classical music, comedy, dance, movies, art and events for children in New York City this week.