https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/world/europe/brexit-supreme-court.html
Britain’s Supreme Court Hears Legal Challenge to ‘Brexit’ - The New York Times
Great Britain Withdrawal from EU (Brexit),Politics and Government,May  Theresa M,Great Britain,European Union
Dec. 5, 2016
5982
LONDON — In one of the most significant constitutional cases in decades, Britain’s Supreme Court began a hearing on Monday to determine whether Parliament should vote before the government begins formal steps to quit the European Union.The outcome of the case could affect the timetable laid down by Prime Minister Theresa May, who wants to start withdrawal negotiations by the end of March. Mrs. May wanted to use prerogative powers to avoid a vote in Parliament. But the government lost a case last month in the High Court, which ruled that lawmakers should be involved in invoking formal exit procedures, under Article 50 of the European Union’s treaty.In the highly charged aftermath of the decision in a June 23 referendum to quit the bloc, the case has also underscored the anger and division that remain in a country polarized by the plebiscite, in which 52 percent voted to leave and 48 percent wanted to remain.One of those who took the government to court, Gina Miller, an investment fund manager, says that she has been threatened with murder and rape by “Brexit” supporters, who accuse her of trying to thwart the outcome of the referendum. She argues that she is standing up for the rights of Parliament.At times, the judges themselves have seemed to be on trial. Those in the High Court who ruled against the government were described by one tabloid newspaper as “enemies of the people.”Some supporters of the British exit have questioned whether the president of the Supreme Court, David Neuberger, might have been compromised because his wife had expressed support for the European Union. A speech delivered by Brenda Hale, the deputy president of the Supreme Court, about the legal arguments ahead of the Article 50 case, also annoyed some exit supporters.On Monday, Lord Neuberger started the four-day appeal hearing with a warning to those who targeted Ms. Miller on social media.“Threatening and abusing people because they are exercising their fundamental right to go to court undermines the rule of law,” he said. “Anyone who communicates such threats or abuse should be aware that there are legal powers designed to ensure that access to the courts is available to everyone.”Lord Neuberger noted that the parties had been asked whether they wished any of the judges to stand down, but had not registered any objections.On behalf of the government, the attorney general, Jeremy Wright, argued that the prerogative power was not “an ancient relic” but a “constitutional necessity.”In its ruling last month, the High Court sided with Ms. Miller and other plaintiffs, who argued that leaving the European Union involved the revocation of certain rights granted to Britons by Parliament, and that lawmakers must therefore have a say, and a vote, before Article 50 is invoked.Were Mrs. May’s government to lose the Supreme Court case, it could complicate its plans for Brexit, but would be unlikely to frustrate them completely. Analysts say that Parliament, which voted in favor of holding the referendum, would be unlikely to block the invoking of Article 50, though it might try to amend legislation and attach conditions to its approval.Perhaps more important, lawmakers would expect the government to explain its objectives to leaving the bloc in greater detail, which could undermine its negotiating position before the talks begin. Critics contend that the real reason is that ministers have yet to agree on a strategy for the negotiations, and that Mrs. May knows that when she does, she risks destabilizing a divided cabinet.A decision from the Supreme Court is not expected for several weeks.One slight, but intriguing, possibility is that the Supreme Court might seek further guidance on whether, once invoked, Article 50 is legally reversible. That question could have a bearing on the central issue of whether the decision to use Article 50 would, inevitably, lead to the end of some rights bestowed by Parliament.Inconveniently for Mrs. May, the ultimate arbiter of European Union law is the European Court of Justice — an institution that is anathema to many supporters of Brexit — and the question of the reversibility of Article 50 could end up in its hands.To complicate matters further for the government, the Supreme Court will also consider issues raised in the courts in Northern Ireland, and by the devolved governments of Scotland and Wales, about whether starting Brexit affects other constitutional arrangements.In theory, an adverse decision could give a veto over invoking Article 50 to the Scottish Parliament and the Welsh Assembly, and in the case of Northern Ireland, a ruling could hold that invoking the article could undermine the Good Friday Agreement, the 1998 peace accord that effectively ended the conflict in Northern Ireland.