https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/29/arts/television/gypsy-netflix-tv-review.html
Review: ‘Gypsy’ and the Problem of Well-Made Bad TV - The New York Times
Television,Gypsy (TV Program),Netflix Inc,Web-Original Programming,Watts  Naomi,Crudup  Billy,Nicks  Stevie
June 29, 2017
7046
TV is suffering from competence. With the medium’s cachet rising, money is pouring into productions, movie talent is lined up to jump ship and the product looks luminous on our giant wide-screen sets. Rarely does a bad show announce itself anymore with klutzy performances and cheap production.Instead, mediocre and even awful TV is often technically very good. This leaves you staring at a series like “Gypsy,” the 10-episode psychosexual thriller that arrives on Netflix Friday, like a what’s-wrong-with-this-picture puzzle. Something’s missing, but the flaw doesn’t leap out at you. The series is elegant, sensitively acted and directed — and an utter snooze.Boredom is the subject of “Gypsy” as well as its substance. Jean (Naomi Watts), a Manhattan therapist, has the kind of lovely life it’s almost mandatory for characters to rebel against: an easygoing lawyer husband, Michael (Billy Crudup); a spunky daughter, Dolly (Maren Heary); and a gorgeous house in Connecticut.She scratches her itch one morning by strolling to a cafe, ordering a chardonnay and flirting with the barista, Sidney (Sophie Cookson), whom Jean gives a false name: Diane. (It’s the ultimate white-collar escape fantasy: Every time Starbucks puts the wrong name on your drink order, it could be a portal to a new identity.)Sidney, it turns out, is the ex-girlfriend of one of Jean’s patients, Sam (Karl Glusman), whose sessions she uses to get information on her new love interest. Therein lies what plot interest “Gypsy” has — whether Jean will slip up and be found out. This seems increasingly likely, as she drops inadvertent hints and practices some sloppy iPhone tradecraft.The themes of “Gypsy,” as the dialogue hammers home, involve duality and the elusiveness of the authentic self. “We all pretend,” Sidney says. “Some of us are just more honest about it.” This idea echoes Fleetwood Mac’s “Gypsy” — about mourning a past version of you — whose lyrics the show’s creator, Lisa Rubin, has cited as partial inspiration. There are hints that, before her suburban ennui, Jean has long had, or wanted, another persona.But none of this is especially novel as it plays out, nor as dangerous as the series seems to feel it is. Jean’s walk on the wild side as Diane is like a married couple’s spicy date night where they role play as strangers — something Jean and Michael do in one episode to break out of their rut.You’ve seen this before, better. “Gypsy” is like “The Affair,” but without the dueling unreliable narratives. (Michael is also having a sad, pedestrian flirtation with his assistant.) The therapy sessions — Jean also treats the controlling mother of an adult daughter and a drug addict in an unhealthy relationship — are like “In Treatment,” but without the nuanced attention to the lives of the patients. The Connecticut home-front drama is like “Big Little Lies,” but without the assumption that the other upscale moms, against whom Jean chafes, are complex people.Ms. Watts — pulling double duty now on Showtime’s “Twin Peaks” revival — does well with what she’s given. Her delicacy of expression is perfect for the kind of psychological portrait “Gypsy” ideally could be. When she gets an illicit jolt from seeing a text from “S.” pop up on her phone at the supermarket, you might feel it run up your own spine.But the scripts and hazy characterizations undermine her. We’re told Sidney has an obsessive effect on her lovers, but her mystery is generic (has British accent, sings in band). The episodes are a slide show of sleek interiors and tastefully shadowed bars, the pacing logy without being suspenseful. Binge-watching it is like binge-drinking cough syrup.Yet there’s so much talent here, waiting for a spark. Stevie Nicks even records a new version of her song for the title sequence. The arrangement is pretty but placid, without the urgent emotion of the original — even though the song is the same, the production is polished and Ms. Nicks’s voice still lovely. That’s “Gypsy,” the show, in a nutshell. There’s nothing wrong with it except everything.