https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/07/magazine/the-6-25-17-issue.html
The 6.25.17 Issue - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 7, 2017
2009
RE: THE BOYS FROM BAGASarah A. Topol wrote about a generation of children abducted by Boko Haram and four who survived.I read this tragic story while sitting before my computer in my air-conditioned home. I had a cup of coffee, a comfortable chair and a roof over my head. I am far from wealthy, but I have a life of safety and comfort. All our lives consist of peaks and lows. Seeing the world as it is today is to witness a low. Unfortunately, our low in America is being written as I sit here. These boy soldiers are still living theirs even though they are now free. Stephen Cone, Bowie, Md.Heartbreaking article. The violence these boys were forced to commit was unspeakably wicked, but it was always the brief reversions back to the innocent life of a young boy that moved me the most. Like when the boy dreamed of his mother washing him and taking care of him, or when he had to climb a tree and cry. A truly astonishing piece of journalism. Oliver Norvato, York, EnglandThis is more than reporting: This is literature in the best sense of the word. I now have an understanding of child soldiers that I wouldn’t have had before.I live in Mexico, where children are also kidnapped and coerced to join the narco bands. Reading this article, I feel a glimmer of hope for the children who manage to escape in Nigeria or in Mexico. Barbara Joan Schaffer, Oaxaca, MexicoRE: NORTH CAROLINAJason Zengerle wrote about North Carolina, a state with a voter base that is narrowly split between Democratic and Republican Parties that agree on virtually nothing.Thanks to the always-insidious influence of the Koch brothers — who succeeded in making sure that Pat McCrory was elected governor of North Carolina and that an admirable senator, Kay Hagan, was prevented from winning a second term — this state has been transformed into a place that is nothing like what it once was. This situation is not owing to the people who live here but to the interference of scurrilous outsiders like the Koch brothers and politicians who do their bidding. Lorrin P. Willis, Cary, N.C.A native Manhattanite, I had to move to North Carolina 40 years ago and wept all the way down Interstate 95. The only ray of hope I had was the memory of Gov. Terry Sanford, who came to speak at my high school during the civil rights movement of the ’60s. I saw the state flourish, its tech industry, arts scene and universities develop. I taught in the public schools and thought I made a difference. And now this. The state is being dragged down by lawmakers who slash funds for education and Medicare and toe the right-wing line instead of trying to improve the lives of the underserved rural population that put them in power. I’ve started telling people I’m a New Yorker living in North Carolina. Elizabeth Khan, Cary, N.C.This article underestimates the dishonesty and just plain meanness of the Republican tyranny in North Carolina. I have lived here since the mid-1980s and have never seen anything like it. Two relatively small episodes are telling. There was an institute to study poverty at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. Its director, a tenured professor at the law school, periodically wrote articles in The Raleigh News & Observer describing poverty in the state and some of its causes, including Republican policies. The Republican-­led General Assembly threw out practically all the members of the board of governors of the state university system and appointed their own people. The board of governors then closed down the institute.When a Republican member of the General Assembly does not like the results of a local City Council or school board election, he or she gets the General Assembly to change the electoral lines to ensure the conservative Republican result desired.These are in addition to the big policy initiatives: cutting taxes for the rich, cutting public education funding and giving it to private schools, the ‘‘bathroom bill,’’ cutting unemployment benefits, refusing a Medicaid expansion, outrageous political and racial gerrymandering, reducing environmental protections and much else. Paul Grendler, Chapel Hill, N.C.