https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/16/movies/jon-watts-director-of-cop-car-rocketing-to-hollywood-from-a-viral-video.html
Jon Watts, Director of ‘Cop Car,’ Rocketing to Hollywood From a Viral Video - The New York Times
Movies,Watts  Jon (Film Director),Cop Car (Movie)
Aug. 12, 2015
9530
To hear the director Jon Watts talk about his film career, you might think much of it happened by chance. His first feature came about because of a prank video that went viral. His second feature, the new thriller “Cop Car,” was based on a recurring dream and written for fun, but the script drew interest from Kevin Bacon, who stars as the not-so-kind Sheriff Kretzer. And now, Mr. Watts, at 34, has already been tapped for a superhero franchise, the latest “Spider-Man” reboot.In “Cop Car,” two boys come across a police car in the woods and take it for a spin, leading to a cat-and-mouse game with the sheriff. Has Mr. Watts’s success been just as random? “My friends and I have always been trying to make movies, at every moment,” he said. “We’ve tried so many different angles and approaches. But when it happens, it happens and you just run with it.”Mr. Watts grew up in Fountain, Colo., where he shot “Cop Car.” He got a scholarship to attend New York University partly because of a video he had made with friends. After college, he formed a small production company with others, making music videos and later directing for television. By phone from Los Angeles, he seemed very casual about his latest good fortune. These are excerpts from the conversation.Q. What was the prank around “Clown”?A. My friends were making music videos, but we would also just post dumb videos to our YouTube page. One of our little clips was a fake trailer for a David Cronenberg-type movie where a man painfully transforms into a clown. We really deadpanned [the trailer] and made it seem believable. And we said that Eli Roth [the horror auteur] directed it.What happened next?We put it up expecting to fool a handful of people, and the next day it had hundreds of thousands of views. I had no idea that Eli had a massive social media presence. All these horror blogs were talking about Eli’s surprise new movie. Then we started to get really nervous. Eli called us. But he was extremely cool about it and asked, “Do you have an idea for what the feature-length version would be?” So we lied and said, “Yeah, of course.” We quickly wrote it, and he got all the financing set up, and we shot it. It was very popular in Italy.How did Kevin Bacon get involved with “Cop Car”?I never thought we would get someone of Kevin Bacon’s caliber to be in this movie. But he read the script and had a window after [the Fox series] “The Following” before he went on his Bacon Brothers tour [with his band]. He wanted to see “Clown” first, though. He loves horror movies.How does a horror flick and a gritty salute to B-movies get you “Spider-Man”?Marvel had seen “Cop Car.” They liked it and wanted me to come in and have a general meeting. Then I kept going back and every time, there were more people in the room. And then I started meeting people from Sony. Eventually I got a call saying I got it.How much pressure are you feeling? What I love about movies is, no matter how many people are involved or how complicated the process is, at the end of the day, it’s just what’s inside of that frame. It’s going to be people sitting in a movie theater watching one shot at a time. And that’s my focus.There’s been criticism about young male filmmakers being tapped for franchises after one or two indie films, opportunities rarely offered to women.Well, I didn’t hire me, you know? I’m not a decision maker in that part of the process. But I think it would be great to have more female directors making huge-budget movies.In “Cop Car,” one of the boys gets the other to repeat curse words. Is that based on personal experience?That’s from a real conversation I had with my friend Chuck. He sincerely believed curse words were just another language in Russia.