http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/24/business/media/24news.html
Peter Chernin, Its President, Leaving News Corp. - The New York Times
Chernin  Peter,News Corporation,Murdoch  Rupert,News and News Media,Suspensions  Dismissals and Resignations
Feb. 23, 2009
9513
Peter Chernin, Rupert Murdoch’s longtime top lieutenant, plans to leave News Corporation when his contract expires in June, a move that renews questions of succession at one of the world’s biggest media companies.After deciding over the weekend to leave the company after 20 years, Mr. Chernin attended the Academy Awards Sunday night, where “Slumdog Millionaire,” a film released by a unit of  the News Corporation that he oversees, won best picture.The departure of Mr. Chernin, 57, comes at an inopportune time for the company, which has been hit harder by the economic downturn than some of its competitors because of its exposure to the troubled newspaper industry.Mr. Chernin’s exit will mean a degree of instability in the News Corporation’s executive ranks at a time when Wall Street has become increasingly frustrated with Mr. Murdoch’s devotion to newspapers, a part of the company’s stable of businesses that Mr. Chernin is not associated with.Mr. Chernin, who has been the News Corporation’s president and chief operating officer since 1996, mainly oversaw the company’s Los Angeles-based businesses, like the 20th Century Fox film studio and the Fox broadcast network. Mr. Chernin joined the company in 1989 as president of entertainment at the Fox Broadcasting Company, overseeing the production of shows like “The Simpsons” and “Beverly Hills 90210.” In 1992, he moved to the film side and became chief executive of Fox Filmed Entertainment; the studio released “Titanic” under his watch.The company said that when Mr. Chernin leaves upon the expiration of his contract on June 30, those Los Angeles-based units of the company will report to Mr. Murdoch.While Mr. Chernin was not seen as a potential successor to Mr. Murdoch — that spot has always been reserved for one of Mr. Murdoch’s offspring — Mr. Chernin  was a highly paid No. 2 whose tenure, in the eyes of Wall Street,  represented unemotional leadership in a company controlled by such a large personality as Mr. Murdoch.Mr. Chernin has often been lavished with praise by  analysts and others in Hollywood, but the dynamic between Mr. Chernin and the Murdoch family was a constant source of speculation within the media industry. Mr. Chernin is also a prominent Democrat in a company whose news outlets, like Fox News and the New York Post, lean rightward, a mix that created an at times awkward situation between Mr. Chernin and Roger Ailes, the head of Fox News who is technically subordinate to Mr. Chernin but in practice answers only to Mr. Murdoch.Mr. Chernin’s exit will now cast a brighter spotlight on James Murdoch, Mr. Murdoch’s youngest son and the only one of his children with an executive role at the company. In late 2007, James Murdoch was elevated to  the newly created post of chairman and chief executive for Europe and Asia.James Murdoch has no comment on Mr. Chernin’s departure, a spokeswoman for News International in London said.In Hollywood, Mr. Chernin has generally been regarded as one of a very small handful of executives — Robert A. Iger of the Walt Disney Company and Barry Meyer of Warner Brothers are two others — who excelled at both the internal dynamics and the rapidly changing economic prospects of the entertainment industry.During a strike by Hollywood writers in 2007, Mr. Chernin was a crucial figure in enforcing an industry position that resisted opening wider swaths of their company operations to representation by the Hollywood guilds. At the same time, however, he was instrumental in brokering the settlement that finally ended the three-month strike.Mr. Chernin also spearheaded many of the News Corporation’s digital initiatives, including the 2005 purchase of the social networking site MySpace and the  2007 creation of Hulu, an online video joint venture with NBC Universal.Jeff Zucker, chief  of NBC Universal, said in an e-mail message, “Peter is as good a media executive as I have ever seen.” The two worked together  to start Hulu.The company made the announcement Monday evening, as Mr. Murdoch was en route to New York from Los Angeles.  Both Mr. Murdoch and Mr. Chernin declined to be interviewed.While Mr. Chernin has never been under the illusion that he would eventually take over for Mr. Murdoch,  he often clashed with Lachlan Murdoch, Mr. Murdoch’s eldest son, who left the company in 2005. And lately, as James Murdoch has steadily gained influence,  it has caused tension among top executives. At the same time, Mr. Murdoch was often irritated by the view  on Wall Street that Mr. Chernin was indispensable to the company.But Mr. Murdoch’s $5 billion purchase of Dow Jones in 2007 reminded observers that  it is Mr. Murdoch who is in charge. The deal represented a large premium to Dow Jones’s value then.“I don’t think it’s a big deal at this point,” said Michael Nathanson, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Company, of Mr. Chernin’s departure. “If the stock was at $18, and this was before Dow Jones, then it would have been a big deal.”News Corporation shares closed Monday at $5.78, down 26 cents.As part of Mr. Chernin’s  severance contract, he will receive lucrative  television and movie production deals with the company, as well as perks like  a car and driver and the use of a private jet. He received a $34 million pay package last year, according to a filing with the Securities & Exchange Commission.Mr. Chernin’s   TV and movie deals  will require Fox  to purchase two movies a year, for six years. Mr. Chernin would get  use of a corporate jet for 50 hours a year, which the company values at $1.65 million over the life of the contract, and a corporate car, which the company values at $210,000. He might also be entitled to secretarial services worth more than $1 million, depending on how  the contract is interpreted.