https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/14/movies/the-9-new-directors-you-need-to-watch.html
The 9 New Directors You Need to Watch - The New York Times
New Directors-New Films (Festival),Movies,Film Society of Lincoln Center,Patti Cake$ (Movie),Jasper  Geremy,Ancarani  Yuri,Olshefski  Jonathan,Rauniyar  Deepak,The Challenge (Movie),White Sun (Movie),Documentary Films and Programs,Beach Rats (Movie),Arabia (Movie),Coulibaly  Daouda,Ekvtimishvili  Nana,Uchoa  Affonso,My Happy Family (Movie),Dumans  Joao,Hittman  Eliza
March 14, 2017
9535
New Yorkers searching for signs of elusive spring need look no further than New Directors/New Films, starting on Wednesday. Each year, this joint production of the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the Museum of Modern Art lands with several dozen movies from what the festival likes to call emerging filmmakers. Although some may never wholly emerge, at least beyond the hothouse confines of the international festival circuit, others are already full-blown talents and will be heard from for years to come. What follows are highlights from the first week.PATTI CAKE$ This year’s opening-night selection is an unambiguous joy. A sensational Danielle Macdonald plays the title character, a.k.a. Patricia Dombrowksi, a working-class New Jersey rapper with big dreams, estimable pipes and dubious prospects. On the face of it, “Patti Cake$” sounds like the ultimate bad Sundance movie (or a Disney princess movie): Patti Cake$ has a dream and she follows it with a song in her heart and a charmingly kooky posse (Cathy Moriarty included). So it’s good that its American writer-director, Geremy Jasper, has a heart as big as the Ritz and the talent to match. (Manohla Dargis)THE CHALLENGE In this ravishing nonfiction feature, the Italian artist Yuri Ancarani trains a steady eye on a familiar tribe: young, restless men with a great deal of time and even greater amount of money. In this case, the men are from Qatar, the tiny gas-and-oil-rich country routinely deemed the wealthiest in the world. “The Challenge” is stuffed with gilded emblems of that wealth, from golden motorcycles to imperial furnishings, although nothing speaks conspicuous consumption more loudly or appallingly than the image of a man driving a Lamborghini with his pet cheetah riding shotgun.Mr. Ancarani’s calm, fixed gaze serves as its own commentary, whether it’s trained on dozens of S.U.V.s massing in the desert or on men lovingly tending to their falcons. In one scene, men sit in tents next to enormous monitors showing a falconry contest in which falcons chase down other birds while they in turn are chased by still other men. Throughout, women are notable by their absence. Despite all the feathery swooping and gunning motors, the flashing gold and pounding sun, these immaculately framed, balanced and photographed images have a tableaulike quality, characterized by a stillness (perhaps cultural or situational) that suggests a memento mori. (M. D.)WHITE SUN Set in the wake of the Nepal civil war, “White Sun” turns on a series of fraught, at times violent oppositions that emerge after the death of a village paterfamilias. It’s a seemingly ordinary event that sets off a series of minor and major dramas, as well as a touch of comedy, and which speaks to the nation’s lingering schism. At center is the increasingly angry confrontation between the dead man’s sons: one, a former Maoist soldier who returns home for the funeral; the other, a political opposite who stayed behind. Each has his reasons, his grudges, his wounds, as well as a shared messy romantic history. Even as the director, Deepak Rauniyar, turns opposition into a structuring principle, he creates a satisfyingly holistic work. (M. D.)THE SUMMER IS GONE A memory movie about once upon a time in Inner Mongolia, “The Summer Is Gone” takes place sometime after Tiananmen Square and before the advent of smartphones. It pivots on a 12-year-old boy, Xiaolei, who drifts through the languid summer days and nights, but its emotional focus are the adults who whisper and fret about larger changes. In one scene, Xiaolei visits his filmmaker father at his work and stares rapt at a film strip as a voice on a loudspeaker announces: “Lifelong jobs will no longer exist. What you’ll earn depends on your ability.” The future is near. The director, Dalei Zhang, dedicated the movie “to the generation that birthed ours,” and while he wraps it in nostalgia, most overtly through the black-and-white cinematography and lush music, there’s real sting here. (M. D.)BEACH RATS The centerpiece film, Eliza Hittman’s second feature, could be described as a coming-of-age story set in an ungentrified section of Brooklyn. The plot more or less follows the conventions of the genre, tracing the emotional, sexual and ethical confusion of a young man (Harris Dickinson, who has a sensitive face and piercing blue eyes) toward a crisis that seems at once shocking and predetermined. But as a visual, sensual experience, Ms. Hittman’s film, shot in 16 millimeter on summer nights around Coney Island, Brooklyn, is something more intriguing: a lyrical, impressionistic plunge into a world defined by longing, anxiety and accidental beauty. (A. O. Scott)WÙLU “Scarface” is the genre gift that keeps on giving, even when set in Mali. Yet one of the strengths of “Wùlu” is that its French writer-director, Daouda Coulibaly, in a tense, tight feature debut, has made a familiar story singularly his own. And while much remains the same — the crime, the punishment and the intimations of incest — here, acts of individual wrongdoing tend to pale next to the wrongs of postcolonialism and organized terror. That deepens the tragedy of Ladji (an excellent Ibrahim Koma), who turns to gangsterism so that his sister will stop turning tricks and who, even as he advances through the underworld, remains as much a victim as a victimizer. (M. D.)ARÁBIA Written and directed by João Dumans and Affonso Uchoa, “Arábia” opens quietly but builds with tremendous emotional force. It begins with André, a lonely teenager in an industrial town nestled in the mountains of eastern Brazil. One day, he begins reading a notebook belonging to Cristiano (Aristides de Sousa), an acquaintance and factory worker. The notebook — and Cristiano’s narration — becomes a portal into a peripatetic life marked by fleeting friendships and relentless privations, countless miles and backbreaking labor. One of the beauties of “Arábia” is that while Cristiano is unquestionably the hero of his life, he is never sentimentalized. Such a transformation might satisfy certain storybook conventions, but Cristiano remains the author of his own story. (M. D.)QUEST Jonathan Olshefski’s documentary about a Philadelphia family, bookended by the presidential elections of 2008 and 2016, shows a kinship with “Hoop Dreams” and “Boyhood” in the way it makes subtle and powerful use of the passage of time. Christopher and Christine’a Rainey and their children endure illness, gun violence and the stresses of life in a working-class African-American neighborhood, but they are the authors of the film as much as its subjects, honest and thoughtful interpreters of their experiences. The movie’s quiet eloquence invites you to reflect on what it means to belong to a family and a place, and also on the nature of citizenship at a time of political polarization. (A. O. S.)MY HAPPY FAMILY Wife, mother, daughter, homemaker, caretaker – Manana (a wonderful, sympathetic Ia Shugliashvili) is playing the usual domestic roles, none of them with much evident pleasure. A female liberation story set in Tbilisi, Georgia, and in a sardonically funny, touching key, “My Happy Family” follows Manana as she leaves her shocked family without explanation, shutting the door on a claustrophobic whirlwind of jostling bodies, hectoring voices and competing needs. As her family insistently tugs at her, Manana resists, settling into a sense of self and letting the wind in the trees serenade her. The Georgian directors Nana Ekvtimishvili and Simon Gross could choreograph a ballet, but, lucky us, they’re filmmakers. (M. D.)