https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/insider/when-the-mother-of-an-opioid-dependent-newborn-hears-you-cant-have-your-baby.html
When the Mother of an Opioid-Dependent Newborn Hears, ‘You Can’t Have Your Baby’ - The New York Times
Babies and Infants,Pain-Relieving Drugs,Drug Abuse and Traffic,Hospitals,Buprenorphine (Drug),Child Custody and Support,Rural Areas,Pregnancy and Childbirth,University of Kentucky,Kentucky
July 14, 2017
5784
It took three months to find Jamie Clay, the young, raven-haired addict at the center of my front-page article on the opioid-dependent babies of rural Kentucky.First, I called hospital associations in states like Tennessee and Kentucky, where large numbers of opioid-dependent babies are born, to try to find rural hospitals that would be open to having a reporter visit.Some hospitals never returned my calls and emails. Others wrote back to say they weren’t interested. A few were. I tracked down physicians and nurses who care for babies born dependent on opioids; I asked each if they had patients I could interview: mothers-to-be who were hooked on opioids or being treated for addiction who were willing to talk to me. Nobody would.Apparently it is one thing to wrestle with the guilt of bringing a baby into the world with withdrawal symptoms, and another to let a reporter be there at the hospital just after birth.Ultimately, I was introduced to Ms. Clay by her OB-GYN, Dr. C. Brent Barton, who offers pregnant addicts treatment for their habit in London, Ky. Our first phone calls were reassuring. Ms. Clay was candid from the start. She told me she was in the throes of addiction when she carried her first child, Jakiah Rayne, and lost custody as a result. She was determined not to let that happen again.I planned to fly to Kentucky to meet her immediately after she delivered at Saint Joseph London, the hospital in the same town as Dr. Barton’s practice.Ms. Clay’s due date was April 7. But in mid-March, I got an urgent text from Dr. Barton: Ms. Clay, who was just shy of 37 weeks’ pregnant, was in labor. The next message said the baby was coming fast, and Ms. Clay wouldn’t make it to London in time.At 3:28 p.m. on March 16, Jay’la Cy’anne Clay was born in the back of an ambulance on Interstate 75. Mother and child arrived at a different hospital, nearby Baptist Health Richmond, soon after. That’s where I met them the next day.Ms. Clay sat in her hospital bed in black sweatpants emblazoned with “EASTERN KENTUCKY” in neon letters. Her family had come to wish her well. Jakiah Rayne, now a rambunctious toddler, was running up and down the hall, trailed by a relative.Early in this pregnancy she had done the “grown-up thing” by asking Dr. Barton for help. After her first trimester she faithfully took buprenorphine, which eased her opioid cravings but put Jay’la Cy’anne at risk for withdrawal. Still, Ms. Clay hoped that, after a limited stay in intensive care, this baby would be able to go home with her.Her best-laid plans soon went awry.A day after Jay’la Cy’anne’s birth, a representative from the Madison County child welfare agency informed Ms. Clay that she would not be going home with the baby at all; the department had decided to award custody to her grandparents and specified that Ms. Clay not be allowed to stay overnight at their home with the baby.“All this time, she’s done this program, and now they say, ‘You can’t have your baby,” Ms. Clay’s mother said. “Jamie is very disappointed.”Ms. Clay joined her parents in the hall to watch Jay’la Cy’anne in the nursery through a window. They said they wished they could have made it to London, which is in a different county. There, the family believes, she might have gotten custody.Ty Wright, the photographer who worked on this article, and I stayed in Kentucky for four more days. We visited the neonatal intensive care unit at the University of Kentucky Children’s Hospital in Lexington, where Ms. Clay’s newborn spent almost two weeks recovering from opioid dependence. We spent an afternoon with the Kentucky Kids Crew, the transport team that brings newborns in severe withdrawal from rural community hospitals to the university hospital for intensive care. In the hall outside the nursery, Ms. Clay quietly sipped soda through a straw. “I’m torn up in my heart,” she told us.Every once in a while, Jay’la Cy’anne’s body jerked, as if she’d been startled — a sign of opioid withdrawal. She lay under warming lights, unaware that the ground had just shifted beneath their feet.