http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/19/business/international/in-china-housing-market-pressure-to-sell-hesitation-to-buy.html
China’s Housing Resists Efforts to Spur Market - The New York Times
Real Estate and Housing (Residential),Real Estate (Commercial),Interest Rates,Economic Conditions and Trends,China
Dec. 18, 2014
7694
HONG KONG —  In Dongguan, a sprawling factory city, one real estate developer has cut prices by 15 percent, offered $1,600 worth of free appliances and even brought in a circus and a traveling zoo to move apartments.In Hangzhou, the affluent hometown of the online retailer Alibaba, families that paid in advance for new apartments have occupied a stalled, half-finished complex.And in Changsha, a bustling river town where developers built a forest of fancy towers, a third of the modern office space is empty and families are mulling whether to buy in a weakening housing market or wait.Every urban real estate market is different in mainland China, driven by myriad municipal and provincial regulations and the varying strength of local economies. But the outcome is the same: The property market is under serious pressure.Prices for newly constructed housing fell 1 percent to 9 percent in recent months in all 70 mainland cities tracked by the national government, according to data released Thursday. Prices kept falling in November compared with October in all but three cities, where they were unchanged.Weak real estate prices are a major challenge for Beijing as it tries to manage an economic slowdown. The Chinese economy, which a few years ago was increasing at an annual 10 percent to 12 percent pace, is now growing at about 7 percent — a rate that President Xi Jinping described last month as “a new normal of China’s economy.”The government has already cut interest rates and authorized state-controlled banks to pump out more loans to prevent the economy from sagging even further, as the housing market has stalled.Real estate is vital. The International Monetary Fund estimated in October that construction and other real estate activities made up 12.8 percent of China’s economic activity, and 33 percent if related activities are included, from making steel for building beams to manufacturing sinks for bathrooms.The fast-growing spending by Chinese households also depends in part on their confidence that home values are increasing. Nine-tenths of Chinese families own their homes, compared with about two-thirds in the United States.Yet real estate developers’ inventories of unsold apartments now equal 12 to 18 months’ worth of sales in China’s biggest cities, like Beijing and Shanghai, according to Haitong Securities, a big Chinese brokerage firm and investment bank. The industry considers six months’ worth of inventory to be healthy.Developers have responded by delaying new projects. In November, housing starts were down 34 percent from a year earlier.For real estate, “the winter has not come yet, but it is coming,” said Hu Yifan, the chief economist for Haitong’s international division.While the property market is under pressure, a crisis does not appear imminent. State-owned banks are reluctant to foreclose on borrowers in arrears, and few buyers are forced to sell at a loss.“There are always going to be cycles — in this country, more than others, the government controls those cycles,” said Marty Burger, the chief executive of Silverstein Properties, which is planning a six-tower complex in Shenzhen, with apartments, offices, stores and hotel rooms. “Over time, it’s going to be a winner because of the growth of China.”But the real estate slump complicates policy-making for the government, which has to strike a tricky balance to prevent social unrest. It wants housing to be more affordable. Apartments in big cities now cost as much as 20 years’ pay for recent college graduates. Even so, the government does not want to set off a slump in prices in a society where households have the vast bulk of their net worth in homes.The overall priority for regulators shifted this fall from making housing more affordable to halting further declines in prices.Dozens of cities, including Changsha, have dropped their bans on out-of-town buyers of residential property, which they had instituted over the last several years to discourage speculation. The Chinese central bank cut regulated interest rates by 0.4 percentage point for mortgages and other long-term loans on Nov. 21, and has authorized banks to offer discounts on these lower regulated rates as well. And banks have been told to act faster on mortgage applications.Regulators also reduced the required down payments. For buyers of second and third homes, they have dropped to 30 percent, from 60 percent to 70 percent. That is still steep by American standards, but manageable for many affluent urban families in China, which commonly save nearly half their incomes.The regulatory changes seem to be cushioning the fall in prices, but not reversing it. The pace at which prices are falling from month to month slowed slightly in two-thirds of Chinese cities in November. Among them was Changsha.A longtime center of chemical and rail manufacturing, Changsha seemed positioned to weather the gradual slowdown in economic growth. The opening of high-speed railroads over the past five years has made it an attractive, low-cost alternative for offices and factories.But developers overdid it. By 2011, nearly 200 tower cranes could be counted just along the half-hour drive from downtown Changsha to the city’s high-speed rail station. Many commercial and residential towers built during the boom are still not full, although more are under construction.Prices have been steadily falling, down 7.4 percent since April. Well-located family apartments in new Changsha buildings sell for around 1 million renminbi, or about $160,000.Huang Yongjun, an administrator in his 30s with a wife and a 9-year-old daughter, said that he had just signed an agreement to buy a 1,140-square-foot apartment because he was fed up with renting and had noticed that Changsha prices still lagged those in the country’s biggest metropolitan areas.“I am buying now because I have a genuine need,” he said. “It will be the first apartment that I have owned.”Wages, too, are playing into the market. Rising wages help more blue-collar workers afford monthly mortgage costs, although they frequently struggle to muster down payments. But increasing labor costs hurt developers’ profit margins and make it increasingly expensive to build more homes.Just a decade ago, China had a glut of young, eager workers. Construction sites commonly operated around the clock, with workers earning as little as $5 for a day’s or night’s work. But the government’s “one child” policy, together with a quintupling in university enrollments in recent years, has produced a dearth of blue-collar workers.Zhang Ruling, a graying migrant worker who pushes wheelbarrows full of bricks at the construction site for the Xinyuan Splendid apartment complex in Changsha, said that he earned $46 for a nine-hour day shift. He turns down night shifts even though local employers offer an extra 29 percent in pay for working after dark.“It is not too tough to find work,” he said. “No one wants to do the night shift since it is more tiring.”Nathan Lai, a spokesman for the Xinyuan Real Estate Company, based in Beijing, which is building the project, said that labor costs had risen nearly tenfold over the past decade. For the 2,140-apartment Xinyuan Splendid project, the land cost $122 million; labor, previously a small expense, cost $45 million; and other costs, like steel girders, added up to $115 million more.While many homeowners, particularly recent buyers and speculators, worry about the fall in prices, others see opportunity. Cao Shi, a Changsha resident in his late 30s who has dabbled in operating small snack shops, said he and his wife paid $60,000 for a 970-square-foot apartment in 2009, and had seen the price for identical nearby apartments rise to $90,000 by last year.Now he estimates that the price of his family’s apartment has dipped to $85,600. “If I had extra money, I would definitely buy a second apartment right now for investment purposes,” Mr. Cao said. “Some people are waiting for prices to drop further, but what if prices go back up? You would have lost the opportunity.”