https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/28/world/middleeast/palestinian-meeting-abbas-meshal.html
Rival Palestinian Leaders Agree to Agree, but Not on the Details - The New York Times
Palestinians,Meshal  Khaled,Abbas  Mahmoud,Hamas,Palestinian Authority,International Relations,Israel,Qatar,Haniya  Ismail,Haniyeh  Ismail
Oct. 27, 2016
4811
JERUSALEM — The leaders of the two main Palestinian factions met on Thursday in the latest attempt to reconcile after a nine-year schism that has divided their people and complicated efforts to negotiate peace with Israel.Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority, run by the Fatah faction, met in Qatar with Khaled Meshal, the political chief of Hamas, and Ismail Haniyeh, the Hamas leader in Gaza. A photograph of the three men smiling was posted online.The meeting was the first between Mr. Abbas and Mr. Meshal in two years. Fatah operates primarily in the West Bank under Israeli occupation while Hamas controls Gaza, which is partly cordoned off from the outside world by Israel. Repeated efforts to bridge the divide between the factions have collapsed.The rival leaders agreed that it was time to repair the rift, establish a national unity government and prepare for elections, the official Palestinian news agency Wafa reported. But it was not clear whether the meeting would lead to an actual agreement, or that such an agreement, even if reached, would prove any more enduring than at least five others sealed over the years.Hamas, considered a terrorist group by the United States, Israel and other nations, won the last parliamentary elections held in both Gaza and the West Bank, in 2006. A year later, it seized control in Gaza, forcing Fatah to retreat to the West Bank. As a result, while the international community treats Mr. Abbas as the leader of the Palestinian people, he does not represent the nearly 2 million people who live in Gaza.A settlement between Fatah and Hamas could further muddy the prospects of a peace process with Israel that long ago stalled. When the two Palestinian factions agreed to resolve their differences two years ago, in a deal that was never fulfilled, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu suspended peace negotiations rather than work with what he called a terrorist organization.Thursday’s meeting comes at a time of tension for Mr. Abbas, whose leadership has been questioned at home and abroad. Municipal elections set by Mr. Abbas have been put off, but he has called for leadership elections within Fatah by the end of the year in an effort to head off internal rivals.It also comes at a time of transition for Hamas. Mr. Meshal, who lives in Qatar, has announced that he will not run for another term in elections expected to be held next year. Mr. Haniyeh is considered a front-runner to succeed him.In a public meeting in Doha, Qatar, last month, Mr. Meshal expressed regret about the takeover of Gaza in 2007. “Hamas made a mistake when it thought it was easy for it to rule the Gaza Strip alone,” he was quoted saying. “It thought that ruling Gaza would be easy, but discovered that it was hard.”The comments were interpreted as a signal of renewed interest in reconciliation with Fatah.Mr. Abbas was in Doha for the funeral of Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad al-Thani, the former emir of Qatar. Arab states like Qatar have tried for years to broker a reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas, and Qatar’s foreign minister, Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim al-Thani, attended Thursday’s meeting.