https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/13/us/police-shooting-of-tamir-rice-is-ruled-a-homicide.html
Police Shooting of Tamir Rice Is Ruled a Homicide - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Rice  Tamir E (2002-14),Cleveland (Ohio)
Dec. 12, 2014
7265
The medical examiner in Cuyahoga County, Ohio, has ruled that the fatal shooting of 12-year-old Tamir Rice by a rookie Cleveland police officer last month was a homicide, and that the boy died from a gunshot wound just above his navel.In a report released on Friday, the medical examiner, Dr. Thomas P. Gilson, said he believed Tamir’s death was the “result of a gunshot wound to the abdomen which injured his inferior vena cava, intestines and pelvis.” The inferior vena cava is a large vessel that returns deoxygenated blood from the lower body to the heart. The autopsy found that doctors had performed a surgical procedure that included “a closure of the inferior vena cava proximal to a gunshot injury.”Tamir was shot about 3:30 p.m. on Nov. 22 after someone called the police to report that he was waving what looked like a gun in a park near his home. Within seconds of arriving, a police officer shot him, but the gun turned out to be a toy used to fire plastic pellets. Tamir was officially pronounced dead at 12:54 a.m. the next day. According to the autopsy, he was 5-foot-7 and 195 pounds and had an appearance “consistent with the reported age of 12 years or older.”A lawsuit filed by the boy’s family says the rookie officer and his partner “refused to provide any medical attention to Tamir for at least four minutes as he lay on the ground alive and bleeding.” According to Cleveland.com, Tamir was not given first aid until an F.B.I. agent with medical training showed up, and the police said an emergency medical crew then arrived three minutes later.“If the police would have attempted to perform C.P.R., which they were trained to do, would that have increased the chance for survival?” asked Benjamin Crump, the Rice family’s lawyer. “Because we know he lived for some time before he died.”“Had the police officers done more to try to preserve Tamir’s life versus trying to preserve their crime scene, this young boy might be living today,” Mr. Crump added.A spokesman for the Cleveland police declined to comment, saying that details about the conduct of the two officers in the minutes following the shooting were “part of the investigative process” and would be released later.