https://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/18/world/europe/russian-police-chase-pussy-riot-protester-into-turkish-space.html
Russian Police Chase Pussy Riot Protester Into Turkish Space - The New York Times
Pussy Riot,Diplomatic Service  Embassies and Consulates,Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,Moscow (Russia)
Aug. 17, 2012
4206
MOSCOW — For a few brief moments Friday, a protester’s reaction to the news that three women in the punk band Pussy Riot were found guilty of hooliganism nearly caused an international incident.The Moscow courthouse where the three women were convicted and sentenced to two years in a penal colony is just down the street from the Turkish Embassy. As protesters seethed outside the courthouse, Tatyana Romanova, a self-professed civil activist wearing a pink balaclava, scaled a lamppost used to mount security cameras and began waving a poster and calling for the release of the band members.Riot police officers began to shinny up the pole after her, but to the crowd’s delight — and cheers — Ms. Romanova leapt away, grabbing a chain-link fence and climbing, almost like Spider-Man, several feet into what might best be described as Turkish airspace.Undeterred, the police officers clambered after her and forced her down. But when everyone’s feet were back on the ground, Ms. Romanova and the Russian officers were on the embassy’s property — Turkish territory. Embassy officials told the police officers that they had crossed out of their jurisdiction, and the officers were promptly asked to leave.In a telephone interview, Ms. Romanova said that a woman identifying herself as an embassy official told the police to go, then took her inside, gave her a glass of water, and told her that she supported the protesters.The Turkish Embassy could not be reached for comment on Friday evening.After about 10 minutes, Ms. Romanova said, the official instructed her to leave the embassy quietly and “blend in the with the crowd.” But upon exiting the building she was immediately apprehended and bundled into a police van.Dozens of supporters awaited Ms. Romanova’s release from a central Moscow jail late Friday night. She was charged with resisting arrest and faces up to 15 days in prison.