https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/smarter-living/unethical-behavior-workplace.html
‘My Hands Were Tied’: How Readers Handled Unethical Workplace Requests - The New York Times
Workplace Hazards and Violations,Ethics and Official Misconduct
July 18, 2017
1047
After an article providing advice for dealing with workplace ethics dilemmas, The New York Times asked readers to share their stories of times when they were explicitly asked to deceive clients, hide misconduct or engage in behavior that violated their principles.Here are some of those stories, which have been edited and condensed for clarity and style.Some people shared stories about being told to refuse service to particular people or to discriminate against colleagues.I was asked to treat my female employees and male employees differently and likewise white and minority differently. These were explicit directives. I explained why I couldn’t legally do that and was left to go about the business of business. The outcome was correct, but the taste in my mouth was bitter.—Ryan Kargel on The New York Times’s Facebook pageI was asked not to serve the homeless man on the corner of the street even though he saved his pennies to come in and buy some coffee. The managers didn’t want him stinking up the bakery. So during my shifts, I ushered him and served him cookies, macarons, ice cream — whatever he wanted. I was fired shortly after.—Ella Lorenzo on The New York Times’s Facebook pageA former supervisor told me that I needed to hire more staff who “reflected the demographic of our clientele” and to “get rid of some staff” who had been working there for a while by “writing them up for every little thing.” I was the director of a high-end child care center in a ritzy neighborhood.—Cindy Tayne on The New York Times’s Facebook pageSome people recalled times when they were told to lie to trick customers.I worked at an elevator/escalator company in the late ‘80s. I maintained the database of all the service calls. Some person was injured on one of the company’s escalators, and my boss asked me to pull all the service call details for that specific escalator. One of the service logs described the escalator as “dangerous.” My boss told me to delete the word “dangerous” from the log. I was a kid just starting out. What could I do? I deleted it.—David Brooks on The New York Times’s Facebook pageWe have been ordered to change stickers so the deodorants of our company would look like the famous ones. The whole office was doing it for two weeks or longer: ripping off actual stickers and sticking on the new ones. For me it felt horrible! But it appeared to me they already had been doing that before. I was a newbie there at the time, and I needed money. I could not afford to quit. I feel ashamed even now, and it happened 16 years ago.—Olga Dmitrieva on The New York Times’s Facebook pageI worked in a campus cafe in college. One day, my boss handed me a spreadsheet of refrigerator temperatures and asked me to fill it in for the past week “just random enough to make it look real.” I said yes at first, hemmed and hawed for a little while, then ultimately gave it back to him and said I couldn’t live with it if someone ended up with food poisoning. He played it cool, but for a 20-year-old, it was nerve-racking.—Bethany Scott on The New York Times’s Facebook pageA company I used to work for forced me to install pirated copies of Microsoft Office and other productivity tools, circumventing the trial offers they had with key generators. My hands were tied because they were sponsoring my J-1 visa, and I did not want to leave the country.—Edwin Ortega on The New York Times’s Facebook pageSome readers recounted being asked to cross ethical boundaries in the medical field and chose to speak out.We had a hospice nurse who was pickpocketing patient meds. Our supervisor said she couldn’t fire her because we didn’t have enough nurses. I threatened to turn them both in to the nursing board. Finally, she fired that nurse.—Carole Marmell on The New York Times’s Facebook pageA doctor asked me to keep a brain-dead 89-year-old alive even if I had to do CPR on her. I refused and told him so. Then he told me I had to do whatever he ordered. I responded, “Um, no, I don’t have to do anything illegal, immoral or unethical.” I was removed from her care. I reported it, and within 10 minutes, she was declared a do-not-resuscitate.—DyAnna Rose on The New York Times’s Facebook pageSome people shared stories of refusing to accept requests from their bosses.“One of my bosses asked me to spy on my co-workers. I said, “if one of the higher-ups asked me to report on her, how would she feel about that?” She didn’t like my answer. Growing up the way I did, I knew not to spy and report on people. That was not what I was hired to do. Sometimes you just have to stand your ground, no matter what the consequences are, and trust it will work out to your best interest. Know that kind of reputation will follow you, and not even a person in the position of authority can trust you if that’s how you operate.”—Diedre Miller on The New York Times’s Facebook pageSign up here to get the Smarter Living newsletter, a weekly roundup of the best advice from The Times on living a better, smarter, more fulfilling life.