http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/20/fashion/in-fashion-gender-lines-are-blurring.html
In Fashion, Gender Lines Are Blurring - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,1.61 (Fashion Label),Gender,Wesson  Kimberly (Designer),Cho  Aimee (Designer)
Aug. 19, 2015
9308
Each time Kimberly Wesson sheds her customary trousers and button-front shirt to put on a flowery dress, she suspects something is off.“I feel like I’m dressing up in someone else’s clothes,” Ms. Wesson said the other day over chilled rosé at her studio in downtown Manhattan. Her frills-adverse approach to dress has tested the tolerance of well-meaning friends. “It’s gotten to the point where they’re pleading, ‘Put on a sequin skirt,’” she said. “Or ‘Dress up like Joan from ‘Mad Men.’”Not likely. Ms. Wesson and Aimee Cho, her business partner, have, after all, poured their style convictions into 1.61, a year-old gender-free label built largely on loosefitting trousers, swagger coats and easy shirts — items that they wear themselves and offer in varying sizes to both women and men.They are among the latest in a raft of designers to capitalize on fashion’s gender blur, that narrowing of the sexual divide that earlier this year emerged on the runways of top tier designers like Rick Owens and Alessandro Michele of Gucci, each bent on eroding the once rigid demarcation between conventionally feminine and masculine clothes.True, the trend today derives much of its impetus from fashion’s fixation with the late ’60s and early ’70s, as younger consumers, and those in their thrall, resurrect a moment when unisex was largely the province of rock royalty, the sequins-and-kimono-wearing likes of Jimi Hendrix and David Bowie.The news is that the movement has gained traction and a measure of cool it hasn’t known since that earliest incarnation, its latter-day grooviness the outgrowth of a loosened-up cultural climate.“Five years ago we weren’t ready for this,” said Humberto Leon, a founder of Opening Ceremony, the vanguard shop on Howard Street, and a longtime proponent of gender-fluid fashion. “The difference today is that this trend has a label,” Mr. Leon said. “And it’s gained acceptance by a mass audience.”Ken Downing, the fashion director of Neiman Marcus, was more emphatic.“What we’re seeing now, he said, “is a seismic shift in fashion, a widening acceptance of a style with no boundaries, one that reflects the way young people dress.”It’s a concept that chimes with the thinking of designers like Rad Hourani, whose gender-free show in January featured models in gender-concealing masks; it informs Nicopanda, Nicola Formichetti’s collection of gender-neutral streetwear; it has inspired Hood by Air and Public School and, before them, Mr. Owens and Martin Margiela, whose collections made hash of a binary gender divide.Recently Miuccia Prada, who has subtly put forward a neo-unisex look in the past, felt compelled to weigh in, telling Style.com this summer, “More and more, it feels instinctively right to translate the same idea for both genders.”And now a handful of younger Americans — among them the designers of 1.61, Telfar and 69 Worldwide in Los Angeles — are advancing the cause, showing identical pieces aimed at both sexes, and striking a chord that is clearly in tune with the times.“The whole perception of sexual orientation is being challenged by the millennials,” said Lucie Greene, the worldwide director of JWT Intelligence, the trend-forecasting arm of J. Walter Thompson. “Among the cohort of 12-to-19-year-olds defining Generation Z, the lines between male and female are becoming increasing blurred.”Trendwatchers describe a cohort that bridles at being boxed in and tends to shrug off conventional gender labels and other rigid classifiers. It’s a generation drawn to brands, yet skeptical of branding and prepackaged looks. Low-key and logo-chary, its members often shop at stores like Muji, Uniqlo and Everlane online for simple, self-effacing uniforms.Some may well be drawn to Telfar, an 11-year-old company in New York. At New York Fashion Week in September, its designer, Telfar Clemens, will show his one-look-fits-all collection of off-the-shoulder tank tops, trench coats and lacelike denim tops and trousers on a cast of androgynous models. Mr. Clemens has stealthily worked the TC logo into many of those pieces, but, he said, “it’s against my nature to do anything really overt. The branding is almost subliminal.”Practically speaking, gender-neutrality is a boon for designers, said Justin O’Shea, the buying director for Mytheresa.com. As he told the online trade publication Business of Fashion last month, designers, by showing men’s and women’s looks in tandem, are saving time and money, and honing an identity.Whether mingling sexes on the runway or creating a single garment intended for both sexes, they are speaking to a sympathetic public. “The modern consumer wants to be part of a bigger picture, part of a movement,” Mr. O’Shea said.That sentiment also reflects a rising receptivity, if not an outright prurient fascination, with topics that were once strictly off limits. Transgender narratives are entering the mainstream via trans-models like Andreja Pejic and Lea T, who front major fashion and beauty campaigns; mega-celebrities like Caitlyn Jenner; and television fare like “Transparent,” the series on Amazon, its lead character Mort (Jeffrey Tambor) coming out to his children as Maura.Responding to a shift in mood, progressive merchants like Acne, Vince and Rag & Bone display men’s and women’s clothes in proximity, some occasionally mixing them on the racks. This year, Selfridges in London dedicated a significant swath of its selling space to Agender, a store-within-the-store where gender-fluid labels like Nicopanda, Ann Demeulemeester and Yang Li commingle.Ed Burstell, the general manager of Liberty of London, called the move “enlightened.”“To devote a full bank of windows and all that real estate for something that could have gone either way was a risk,” he said. “But it forced that conversation that we need to have.” While Liberty itself has no similar merchandising plans, unisex items make up some 25 percent of the store’s fall fashion purchases, he said.Many women freely embrace the notion of gender fluidity, buying men’s wear in small sizes at stores like Odin, Cadet and Dover Street Market. At Gucci, the sales staff reports that more women than men are buying the pussy-bow blouses from Mr. Michele’s fall men’s collection, just now arriving at the stores.Men, on the other hand, “have traditionally been immune to gender-neutral fashion trends,” said Kimberly Chrisman-Campbell, a fashion historian and the author of “Fashion Victims: Dress at the Court of Louis XVI and Marie-Antoinette.”“We may think we are in a new phase, but we aren’t necessarily,” she said. “What we’re talking about is the leading edge of fashion, not what you’re going to find at J. Crew.”“Still”, Ms. Chrisman-Campbell said, “every time these trends come up they push the boundaries a little bit more.”Giving the trend a push are artists and professional outliers.“This is very feminine,” Coleman Feltes, a D.J. and music curator, said of his button-front shirt, exuberantly patterned with daisies, roses and butterflies. Mr. Feltes, who was heading home to the financial district with his children last week, had rendered his look street-worthy by combining it with camouflage shorts. “The camo,” he said, self-assured, “takes away from the floweriness.”Inevitably, some at fashion’s leading edge have already moved on, questioning whether unisex is a trend at all or, as some have suggested, a passing illusion pulled from a stylist’s bag of tricks.“Our clients have been there, done that,” said Judson Harmon, the owner of Odd, a four-year-old shop on the Lower East Side that made its name with nongender-specific offerings, its message reinforced by a mannequin, half male, half female, that greets visitors.That mannequin will be coming down, Mr. Harmon said. “We’re not abandoning the versatility of unisex. We’re just not targeting it.”