https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/07/us/politics/donald-trump-steals-the-show-mixing-politics-and-pizazz.html
Donald Trump Steals the Show, Mixing Politics and Pizazz - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Debates (Political),Primaries and Caucuses,Kelly  Megyn,Republican Party,Fox News Channel,Cleveland (Ohio),Clinton  Hillary Rodham,Reagan  Ronald Wilson
Aug. 7, 2015
7252
Donald J. Trump was outrageous. He was demeaning. He was even somewhat menacing, warning a female moderator that he could turn on her at any moment.When confronted with his tendency to describe the women he dislikes as “fat pigs,” “slobs” or “disgusting animals,” he dismissively replied that neither he nor the United States “have time for political correctness.”After he thoroughly rattled the Republican presidential field and emerged as its singular vexation in the 2016 campaign, the question hovering over Mr. Trump, the developer turned reality TV star turned candidate, was whether he would adopt the measured and diplomatic manner of a plausible president for Thursday night’s debate.Not a chance.From the opening moments of the evening, when he flashed a wry grin and a mischievous victory sign at the boisterous crowd, Mr. Trump remained his irrepressible self: aggrandizing, unapologetic and cutting.“I don’t think you heard me,” he scowled at Senator Rand Paul, when the lawmaker — who uses hearing aids — sought to interrupt him, then added condescendingly, “You’re having a hard time tonight.”Over and over, in moments that were as startling as they were comedic, he openly flouted the rules of political decorum — not to mention those of a Republican Party that punishes disloyalty and the slightest flirtation with members of the opposition.At one point, Mr. Trump bragged about his donations to the nation’s leading Democrat and a rival candidate for the White House, Hillary Rodham Clinton, saying the contribution gave him the power to beckon, if not demand, her attendance at his most recent nuptials.“I said, ‘Be at my wedding.’ And she came to my wedding,” Mr. Trump declared. “You know why? She didn’t have a choice because I gave.”At another moment, he boasted about making a “lot of money” before abandoning his casino business in a struggling Atlantic City as a dumbfounded Chris Christie, the governor of New Jersey who has sought to revive the seaside town, looked on. “Chris can tell you,” Mr. Trump said.In his antic performance, Mr. Trump telegraphed that he would stick with a candidacy whose sole selling point is a fiery and uncontrollable personality. And it is unclear that he is capable of, or even interested in, turning the anger that he has stirred into a full-fledged political movement or a set of policy prescriptions that could attract a broader following.He seemed to both amuse and alienate the audience at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland and beyond. He severely tested their tolerance when, at the start of the debate, he blithely refused to rule out a third-party run that could doom the Republican nominee.In an unfamiliar experience for a candidate accustomed to adoring crowds, the arena erupted into jeers.“I have to respect the person,” Mr. Trump said of the nominee, suggesting that should the winner be somebody other than him, that would be highly unlikely.His rivals seemed painfully unsure of how to respond to his overwhelming stage presence. They tried flattery (“He is hitting a nerve,” said Gov. John Kasich of Ohio). They tried emulating him. (Senator Ted Cruz of Texas said the country needs a truth teller.) One of them, Mr. Paul, courted danger by directly confronting Mr. Trump, seizing on what would seem to be an obvious vulnerability: Mr. Trump’s past support for Democrats.“He buys and sells politicians of all stripes,” Mr. Paul said with disdain.Mr. Trump’s reply? I bought you, too.“I’ve given plenty of money to him,” he said.Everything about Mr. Trump’s comportment on Thursday conveyed complete indifference to the expectations of the Republican establishment.His preparations were virtually nonexistent. As his fellow White House aspirants diligently rehearsed for the two-hour forum, burying themselves in briefing books and devoting days to mock debate sessions, he blithely announced that such labors were unnecessary. And he seemed to treat the event itself as just another appointment on his packed schedule, arriving in Cleveland oddly late in the day, aboard his Boeing 757.His dead-center placement on the stage amounted to a signal moment in the interlacing of America’s political system and its entertainment industry. Not since 1980, when Ronald Reagan, a Hollywood leading man who built a comparatively hefty résumé in government as the two-term governor of California, has either party fielded a candidate who so conspicuously straddled both worlds.At times on Thursday night, it was hard to distinguish between Mr. Trump the presidential candidate and Mr. Trump the irascible reality TV star, ready to fire the Fox News hosts sitting in front of him.When Megyn Kelly pressed Mr. Trump on his unflattering descriptions of women, Mr. Trump grew impatient and, finally, intimidating.“Honestly, Megyn, if you don’t like it, I’m sorry,” he said. “I’ve been very nice to you, although I could probably maybe not be based on the way you have treated me.”Despite the assurances from the moderators that Mr. Trump would not hijack the high-profile opportunity for the Republican field to introduce itself to America, the businessman could not be stopped.He received about three times as many opportunities to speak as some of his fellow candidates — a gap that left lesser-known rivals, like Ben Carson, moaning about an elusive spotlight. “I wasn’t sure I was going to get to talk again,” Mr. Carson said plaintively.But as Mr. Trump learned, when the show is not your own, it is difficult to control the outcome.Whenever the crowd or the moderators signaled disapproval, a pursed-lipped frown came over his face and he seemed genuinely wounded.“I don’t think they like me very much,” he said.