https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/02/world/asia/afghanistan-kabul-dostum-ghani.html
Gun Battle Between Ethnic Factions Roils Afghanistan’s Capital - The New York Times
Dostum  Abdul Rashid,Kabul (Afghanistan),Ghani  Ashraf,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Tajiks (Ethnic Group),Afghanistan,Hazaras (Ethnic Group),Uzbeks (Ethnic Group),Kalakani  Habibullah
Sept. 1, 2016
1795
KABUL, Afghanistan  — Militia forces loyal to the Afghan vice president, the former warlord Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, fought a gun battle with a group of northern Tajik demonstrators in the heart of Kabul on Thursday, leaving at least one person dead and several wounded in a chaotic scene that shook the country’s civil-war fault lines from a generation ago.The standoff in the capital, a clear breakdown of law and order, continued late into Thursday night, and at once highlighted the fragility of Afghanistan’s factional and ethnic balance. Elite government security forces were deployed at the scene to control armed men from both sides, with some officers saying they had moved to disarm General Dostum’s forces, who are mostly ethnic Uzbeks.President Ashraf Ghani called an emergency meeting of his national security council, officials said, but General Dostum would not attend. Western diplomats were trying to intervene to calm the situation.It was a troubling start to an already challenging month ahead for Mr. Ghani’s government. The government faces a test from a different ethnic demonstration — led by the Hazara minority — scheduled to take place in another part of Kabul on Friday. And important political deadlines for the government were already being missed because of an intensifying political opposition and governmental infighting.The clashes began Thursday afternoon after devotees of Habibullah Kalakani, a fundamentalist Tajik insurgent who briefly seized the Afghan throne in 1929, wanted to rebury him with honors on Kabul’s Shahrara Hill. Mr. Kalakani, known as the Bandit King, was deposed after nine months and killed by a firing squad, and some say he was treated unfairly by a despotic dynasty of ethnic Pashtuns who retained power.General Dostum’s supporters, who say the hill that demonstrators chose in Kabul has historic value to their Uzbek tribe, clashed with men who were trying to dig graves on Wednesday night for Mr. Kalakani and his executed retinue.When the Tajik demonstrators, insisting that it was a matter of honor to go ahead with the burial plan, arrived with the bodies at the foot of the hill, armed clashes broke out. At least one of Mr. Dostum’s men was killed, a spokesman said, and several other men were wounded on each side.In a cellphone video from his home, General Dostum told supporters that he could not tolerate the demonstrators’ demands.“If they had consulted me, I would have given them place here next to my home for the burial. But, unfortunately, this is talking force — and General Dostum has never accepted that, and cannot,” General Dostum said in the video. “They are telling me to do this — and I say, even if my blood is shed, I cannot do this.”But late in the evening, with heavy presence of Afghan Special Forces, the demonstrators continued to dig graves on the hill. About 17 coffins sat there as the armed men lingered, some shouting “Death to Dostum!” and “Long Live Emir Habibullah Kalakani,” who has been dead for more than 80 years.Some local news channels reported late Thursday night that the burials were complete.Fahim Kohdamani, a member of the group dedicated to the reburial, expressed frustration. “We talked last night with government officials about this issue and there was no problem,” he said, “but at midnight General Dostum sent his men like militia forces, and they prevented the digging of graves here.”The clash started off a month that will surely be a test of Mr. Ghani’s political acumen, as well as the survival of his coalition government.The end of September marks two years of his coalition government, a deadline by which he was supposed to deliver parliamentary elections as well as confirm, through a grand assembly of elders, the position of prime minister for Abdullah Abdullah, his former election rival who now serves as his chief executive. Some opposition groups are calling for a referendum on the fate of the government for its failure to meet the deadlines.Internally, too, the government has struggled. In recent weeks, Mr. Abdullah publicly lashed out at Mr. Ghani for not honoring the political agreement that brought them together. As Mr. Ghani began trying to mend ties with Mr. Abdullah, General Dostum, long known for his volatile personality, spoke out against being marginalized in his role as vice president, and he now has gotten involved in a messy armed clash.On top of all that, the ultimatum for another protest movement — by ethnic Hazaras accusing Mr. Ghani’s government of discrimination and demanding a particular route for an electricity line in central Afghanistan — has also expired. The movement has called for a large gathering in western Kabul on Friday, 40 days since a suicide-bombing killed at least 80 people in one of its previous protests.