https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/30/world/asia/chinese-antigraft-campaign-focuses-on-a-coal-rich-province.html
China’s Antigraft Campaign Expands to a Coal-Rich Northern Province - The New York Times
China,Shanxi Province (China),Bai Yun,Ren Runhou,Coal,Corruption (Institutional),Mines and Mining,Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (Communist Party of China),Ling Jihua,Ling Zhengce,China Resources Holdings
Aug. 29, 2014
7769
HONG KONG —  Newly disclosed investigations into senior politicians in Shanxi Province, an area in northern China rich in coal and opportunities for graft, reveal an emerging front in Communist Party leaders’ efforts to show they are serious about eradicating corruption.On Friday, the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, the Chinese Communist Party’s central agency for uncovering graft, announced that two senior Shanxi politicians faced investigation for “serious violations of discipline and the law,” a euphemism for corruption and related abuses of power.One was Bai Yun, a member of the provincial party’s Standing Committee; the other was Ren Runhou, a deputy governor who was formerly a chairman of a Shanxi mining company.Shanxi Province, with its dense web of officials, coal wealth and resource deals, appears to be President Xi Jinping’s next proving ground for trying to convince officials and the public that he is serious about ending entrenched graft in the party’s ranks.The inquiries into Ms. Bai and Mr. Ren were disclosed nearly a week after the Central Commission said it was investigating two other senior officials in Shanxi, a development that followed a succession of other inquiries this year. The public security chief of Taiyuan, the provincial capital, was dismissed, and reports said he faced allegations of graft. Other reports said Zhang Xinming, a coal baron in Shanxi who is trailed by controversy, had been taken away by investigators after an inquiry into a state company that made a disputed mine purchase from him.Including the announcement about Ms. Bai, six former or current members of the Shanxi party’s Standing Committee, the province’s most powerful governing body, have come under investigation this year. At least 17 other officials in the province have been investigated on suspicion of corruption or other abuses of power, according to a count from the Central Commission’s website.“Corruption here has become even worse than in other provinces, much worse,” Gao Qinrong, a former journalist from Shanxi who closely follows politics there, said by telephone from Taiyuan. Mr. Gao was arrested in 1998 and imprisoned for eight years after reporting on corruption in Shanxi.As China’s economy and energy demand boomed over the past decade, Shanxi prospered from coal and associated industries. It also grew deeply corrupt. The inquiries are likely to ensnare more officials who peddled access to mines, land, credit, business orders and promotions, Mr. Gao said.“It has coal; coal brought money; that brought corruption,” he said of Shanxi. “With all the money around, officials threw themselves into buying and selling posts, and with the posts, they could get more coal and more money.”Corruption investigators have already burrowed deep into Sichuan Province, in southwestern China, which was once run by Zhou Yongkang, the most senior official to come publicly under a corruption inquiry since the founding of the People’s Republic. Teams from the Central Commission have also investigated other provinces.On Friday, the commission announced that yet another prominent politician had been placed under investigation for “suspected serious violations of discipline and of laws.” The official, Bai Enpei, is a senior member of the National People’s Congress — the party-controlled legislature — and was a former party chief of Yunnan Province in southwestern China.The investigations in Shanxi have drawn particular attention because of the wealth at stake and because the inquiries could touch levels of the political elite that once seemed invulnerable. In June, Ling Zhengce, whose brother Ling Jihua was a top aide to Hu Jintao when Mr. Hu was president, lost his post as deputy leader of a government advisory council in Shanxi and was put under investigation.Ling Jihua has not been publicly accused of any misdeeds by the government. But the inquiries into his brother and other officials have left him vulnerable, Mr. Gao said.The party’s graft inquiries have become a ritualized procession: The Central Commission, or a local branch, names officials under investigation for “violations of discipline”; their colleagues gather to endorse the inquiry, denounce their former comrades and vow loyalty to the party and to Mr. Xi; and the state-controlled news media issues reports about the misdeeds and sordid lives of the fallen officials. The situation has happened in Shanxi in the past week.Last Saturday, the commission announced two new targets: Chen Chuanping, the party chief of Taiyuan; and Nie Chunyu, a senior administrator of the province’s Standing Committee. On Sunday, the Taiyuan authorities announced that the city’s public security chief, Liu Suiji, had been dismissed, and local news reports later said that Mr. Liu was ensnared in corruption allegations.Separately, China Resources Power, embroiled in a disputed mine deal in Shanxi, said Tuesday that its president, Wang Yujun, was under investigation and had been suspended. The company, listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, is an arm of China Resources Holdings, a state-owned conglomerate whose chairman, Song Lin, came under investigation in April, after he was criticized over the deal.China Resources Holdings and China Resources Power engineered the purchase of three mines and other facilities in Shanxi in 2010, which aggrieved shareholders said were worth much less than the $1.6 billion or so that China Resources arms and a partner state firm paid for a controlling stake, according to documents filed in a lawsuit in Hong Kong. China Resources denied any wrongdoing but later said it was cooperating with the inquiry into Mr. Song.In the past week, news reports said that Mr. Zhang, whose company sold the mines to China Resources, was detained for investigation early this month.“The Shanxi case has just started,” Li Jianjun, a freelance Chinese journalist who has pursued the allegations about Mr. Zhang and China Resources, said in an interview. “It must continue upward. There were umbrellas protecting the corruption,” he said, using a Chinese term for official patrons.