https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/26/opinion/finding-common-ground-with-china.html
Finding Common Ground With China - The New York Times
Editorials,Xi Jinping,Obama  Barack,Greenhouse Gas Emissions,South China Sea,Cyberwarfare and Defense,Cyberattacks and Hackers,Carbon Caps and Emissions Trading Programs,Air Pollution,United States International Relations,Industrial Espionage,Intellectual Property,China
Sept. 25, 2015
6313
Despite growing strains between their countries, President Obama and President Xi Jinping of China made progress on two key issues during their meeting on Friday, offering some reassurance that they may be able to manage the challenges ahead.Of greatest significance is Mr. Xi’s commitment to start a national program in 2017 that will limit and put a price on greenhouse gas emissions. Such a cap-and-trade system will require big changes by the government, but if carried out, it would mark a major step by the world’s largest polluter to reduce industrial emissions. It would also deprive Republicans in Congress of an excuse to avoid taking steps to address climate change. Over the years they have opposed efforts to limit greenhouse gases in the United States on the grounds that China, the world’s second-largest economy, has done little to limit its emissions.Coupled with emissions reductions pledges announced jointly last year, China’s commitment offers hope that the two countries will present a unified front at the climate change summit in Paris this December.Mr. Obama also announced that he had reached a “common understanding” with Mr. Xi to combat “cyber-enabled theft of intellectual property.” They endorsed a United Nations accord, adopted in July, that commits the signatories to not target one another’s critical infrastructure — power plants, cellphone networks and financial transactions — in peacetime. They also pledged to have a more formal dialogue on fighting cybercrime, something Beijing has long resisted.But Mr. Obama was appropriately skeptical about the Chinese commitments, saying there was a question about whether the words would be followed by action and warning, “We will be watching carefully.” The Americans contend that China is responsible for the cybertheft of security data on roughly 22 million Americans from the Office of Personnel Management. Mr. Obama should be prepared to to consider retaliatory action if there are further attacks.It was disappointing that there was no progress toward resolving the tension on the South China Sea, where China has been converting reefs into islands big enough to handle military runways and ports — a direct challenge to other Asian countries that also have territorial claims there. Mr. Xi said he wanted to resolve the disputes peacefully, but his dangerous tactics and attempts to bully neighboring countries has heightened concerns about a possible hostile confrontation in that region.Projecting strength remains central to Mr. Xi and his government. But for now, domestic discontents like the recent market crash and slowing economic growth are problems enough, without their provoking new troubles abroad.