https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/briefing/republican-party-wimbledon-game-of-thrones.html
Republican Party, Wimbledon, ‘Game of Thrones’: Your Monday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 17, 2017
223
 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Uncertainty on health care bill.Senator John McCain could be out of action for weeks after surgery, and a vote on the Senate Republican plan to dismantle the Affordable Care Act may have to await his return.Mr. McCain’s absence presents a problem for the Republican Party: The more the vote is delayed, the more likely the bill is to fail, supporters and opponents say.The health proposal got a frosty reception from governors, and there are fears that bare-bones policies will amount to “junk insurance.”•  Trump rails against Russia coverage.After watching a golf tournament at one of his clubs, President Trump turned to Twitter to excoriate Hillary Clinton and to rebuke the news media for its coverage of his son’s meeting with a Russian lawyer in June 2016.We profiled two others at that meeting: Rinat Akhmetshin, who has shown himself to be skilled in the muscular Russian version of what in American politics is known as opposition research, and  Aras Agalarov, a property developer known as a fixer for the Kremlin’s toughest jobs.Our reporters also investigated a $17 million payment to Paul Manafort, Mr. Trump’s former campaign chairman, from a Kremlin-linked political party in Ukraine.• Skidding off the rails.Before Cosmo DiNardo confessed to killing four young men in Bucks County, Pa., there were signs of a volatile, bullying personality getting worse over time.• Iran sentences U.S. student to 10 years.Xiyue Wang, a graduate student at Princeton, was sentenced on spying charges, an action bound to aggravate relations between the two countries.• Qatar’s open doors sow resentment.The small country with a welcome-all attitude has become the freewheeling hub of the Middle East. But that’s precisely what has plunged the region into one of its most dramatic showdowns.• “The Daily,” your audio news report.Today we discuss Kris Kobach’s quest to investigate allegations of voter fraud in the U.S.Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.• Big pharma has been spending on share buybacks and dividends, but research and development? Not so much.• After the death of a Silicon Valley lawyer, his ex-wife found a web of drug abuse in his profession.• In urban China, cash is rapidly becoming obsolete.• The Dow and the S.&P. 500 closed at record highs on Friday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• Items under $50  that might improve your life, and more, in our weekly newsletter.• Saving for college? Here’s what you need to know.• A quick dinner need not lack flavor. Try shrimp in yellow curry.• Hundreds of thousands of supporters of the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, marched to commemorate the anniversary of last year’s failed coup.• Columbia University settled with a student who was cast as a rapist in a performance art piece involving a mattress.• “Game of Thrones” is back. Read our review of the season premiere, and sign up here for exclusive interviews and explainers.Separately, “Doctor Who” is breaking the mold with a female lead.• “War for the Planet of the Apes” was No. 1 at the North American box office, taking in $56.5 million.• Taking flight in Peru.In today’s 360 video, soar with a paraglider over Lima’s cliffs.• A hefty toll.The U.S. spent more than $1 trillion and lost about 4,500 service members in Iraq. Today, Iran’s influence there is paramount, our correspondent writes.• Turning the corner.As the U.S. prison population drops and the number of parolees increases, a Connecticut man learns that getting out of jail isn’t  the same as being free.• Eight and counting.Roger Federer   defeated Marin Cilic to win an eighth Wimbledon singles title, a record in the men’s tournament.Garbiñe Muguruza took the women’s title, crushing the hopes of Venus Williams.• In memoriam.Maryam Mirzakhani, the only woman and only Iranian to win a Fields Medal, the most prestigious honor in mathematics, died of breast cancer at 40.Martin Landau, who appeared in the 1960s TV show “Mission: Impossible” and won an Oscar for “Ed Wood,” died at 89.• Quiz time!Did you keep up with last week’s news from around the world? Test your knowledge.• Quotation of the day.“That thumb I have left helps me a lot. I thank God for it.”Razak Iyal, a Ghanaian who lost every finger and his left thumb to frostbite when he and a fellow refugee  walked across the U.S.-Canada border in December.Sixty-two years ago, the first Disneyland opened in Anaheim, Calif., on what had once been an orange grove. Walt Disney himself greeted the very first of that day’s estimated 15,000 guests.The opening was covered on television on a par with “the dedication of a national shrine,” The Times wrote, and later explained the appeal: “Children see their old friends from nursery songs and fairy tales impersonated by local characters.”Perhaps the best-known of those childhood friends, Mickey Mouse, turns 90 next year.The Mickey phenomenon first swept across the world during the Great Depression. Some reacted with skepticism, some countries banned it, but most found solace in the story of an irreverent mouse.“Perhaps it is the bitterness of the struggle to earn a living in Europe this year that has brought Mickey Mouse such tremendous success — Mickey who is forever gay, Mickey who is only made of ink and cannot possibly be hungry, cold or weary,” read a report from Germany in 1931.And the character’s popularity endures. When the latest major Disney theme park opened last year in Shanghai, mouse ears were one of the biggest sellers.Patrick Boehler contributed reporting._____Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.