http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/31/world/asia/31korea.html
Koreans Reunite at a Red Cross Gathering - The New York Times
South Korea,North Korea,Families and Family Life
Oct. 30, 2010
4993
SEOUL, South Korea — Hundreds of South Koreans, separated from family members in North Korea for more than half a century, were reunited with their relatives on Saturday as a Red Cross gathering got under way at the Diamond Mountain resort in the North.The South Koreans arrived with gym bags and suitcases bulging with goods suggested by the Red Cross, daily amenities that are scarce in the impoverished North — sugar, soap, underwear, aspirin, toothpaste and toothbrushes, vitamins, wool socks, even sacks of rice. Some South Koreans also took United States dollars, even though gifts of currency were discouraged by the organizers.A brief exchange of gunfire between North and South Korean troops on Friday night did not delay or cancel the event. No one was injured in the cross-border shooting, an official with the Defense Ministry said, and analysts in Seoul said they believed that the initial shots, from the North, were probably accidental.The reunion that began Saturday was the first in more than a year. It was to continue until Tuesday, and a second group of relatives is scheduled to begin another meeting from Wednesday to Friday. About 100 families from each country will meet up with one or more relatives.Most families became separated during the 1950-53 Korean War, essentially becoming stranded on opposite sides of the border when the fighting stopped.Virtually no communication channels exist for average North and South Koreans. There is no inter-Korean travel  and both governments block telephone, Internet and postal services.Oh Seung-geun, 76, a former South Korean Air Force captain, waited 15 years to be chosen for a reunion. He said he got a call from the Red Cross two weeks ago telling him he had been approved to go to Diamond Mountain, and he was hoping to see two sisters, a younger brother and a cousin.“Even if only one of them shows up,” he said, “my heart will be open.”The meetings can be thrilling and joyful, or  awkward and tense, say those who have attended. Both delegations have “minders” who monitor conversations, and many North Koreans feel unable to speak freely with the regime’s authorities nearby. Wealthier relatives from the South can be too persistent in asking about the daily deprivations and oppressive political life in the North.“I know the North Korean regime, I grew up with that system,” said Mr. Oh, who was born in Pyongyang, the North’s capital, in 1934. “If I talk about certain things, it could be perilous for my family.”The current reunion is the 18th  since 2000. Nearly 21,000 South Koreans have been reunited with relatives so far, the Red Cross said, including about 4,000  connected through video conferencing.Meanwhile, 88,000 South Koreans are on a Red Cross waiting list. But time is running out; about half the South Korean applicants are now over  80.The family reunions have become a highly politicized issue for the North and the South alike. The historian James A. Foley, in his book about separated Korean families and cross-border reunions, detailed the “long history of both sides’ manipulation of the divided families issue for their own political gains.”The South has pressed the North for larger and more frequent reunions, but negotiations broke down last week, and the future of the reunions remained unclear.The talks ended as North Korea, through its Red Cross team, requested donations of 500,000 tons of rice and 300,000 tons of fertilizer. South Korean Red Cross officials said they were not authorized to agree to so much aid, and analysts said the conservative government of President Lee Myung-bak was unlikely to grant the request.