http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/22/us/sandra-bland-was-combative-texas-arrest-report-says.html
Sandra Bland Was Threatened With Taser, Police Video Shows - The New York Times
Bland  Sandra (1987-2015),Encinia  Brian T (1985- ),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Waller County (Tex),Texas,Suicides and Suicide Attempts
July 21, 2015
7325
HEMPSTEAD, Tex. — A dashboard camera video taken by law enforcement officers and released Tuesday showed in excruciating detail how a routine traffic stop led to a shouting match and struggle between a state trooper and a woman, three days before she was found hanging in her jail cell.State legislators who saw the video of the arrest of the woman, Sandra Bland, just before it was publicly released sharply condemned the officer’s behavior, which the director of the Texas Department of Public Safety, Steven McCraw, said was a violation of department arrest procedures. State Senator Royce West, Democrat of Dallas, said Ms. Bland, 28, should never have been taken into custody.State Representative Helen Giddings, Democrat of Dallas, said, “This young woman should be alive today.”Ms. Bland, an African-American from the Chicago area who had come to Texas for a job at her alma mater, Prairie View A&M University, was arrested after she was stopped July 10 for failure to signal a lane change.The video showed the officer pulling Ms. Bland over and their encounter escalating into a physical altercation in which he threatened her with a stun gun.“I will light you up,” the trooper said, pointing the stun gun at her.The video also confirmed an account from the family’s lawyer that the confrontation between Ms. Bland and the trooper, Brian T. Encinia, escalated after she refused his order to put out a cigarette, Mr. West said.Neither the stun gun nor the confrontation over the cigarette was mentioned in Trooper Encinia’s incident report, which was also made public on Tuesday.The video showed Trooper Encinia standing outside the driver’s door and explaining to Ms. Bland that she was being written up for failing to signal a lane change.“You seem very irritated,” he said.“I am, I really am,” she said. She said she had pulled over to get out of his way and was now getting stopped and written up because of it.“You mind putting out your cigarette?” he asked testily.“I’m in my own car. I don’t have to put out my cigarette,” she said.When he ordered her out of the car, she refused.“I’m going to yank you out,” Trooper Encinia shouted.Before long, Ms. Bland was outside the car shouting insults and obscenities, and the trooper had her in handcuffs.In part of the encounter that occurred out of the camera’s view, a scuffle could be heard, and Ms. Bland indicated that she was on the ground. “You just slammed me, knocked my head into the ground,” she said.Addressing Trooper Encinia with an expletive, she said, “I got epilepsy.”Trooper Encinia responded, “Good.”In the affidavit, Trooper Encinia described Ms. Bland as “combative and uncooperative” and said she had begun swinging at him with her elbows after she was removed from the car, handcuffed and forcibly subdued, according to his arrest report.“Bland was placed in handcuffs for officer safety,” Trooper Encinia said in the arrest affidavit. “Bland began swinging her elbows at me and then kicked my right leg in the shin. I had a pain in my right leg and suffered small cuts on my right hand.”The affidavit was released by the Waller County district attorney’s office, and the Department of Public Safety released the dashboard camera’s video of the arrest.Ms. Bland’s death has been ruled a suicide, but her supporters have disputed the findings as calls grow for a Justice Department investigation.According to the Waller County sheriff’s office, Ms. Bland appeared in good health when she was booked and placed in Cell 95 in a housing area for women in the one-story jail. A jailer making rounds found her hanging in her 15-by-20-foot cell shortly after 9 a.m. on July 13.Waller County officials said Ms. Bland had been found in a “semi-standing position,” hanged with a plastic trash-can liner affixed to a U-shaped metal hook. Jail officials and emergency medical personnel placed her on the floor and unsuccessfully administered cardiopulmonary resuscitation before she was pronounced dead at 9:16 a.m.The liner had been taken from the trash container in her cell, said Brian Cantrell, a criminal investigator for the sheriff’s office. The Texas Commission on Jail Standards has since ordered trash-can liners removed from the jail, Officer Cantrell said.The Harris County medical examiner — who officials said had conducted the post-mortem investigation because of inadequate medical facilities in rural Waller County — ruled the death a suicide resulting from self-inflicted asphyxiation, but the Waller County district attorney, Elton Mathis, told reporters on Monday that he was pursuing the case “like a murder investigation.”“There are too many questions that need to be resolved,” Mr. Mathis said. The case will most likely be referred to a Waller County grand jury scheduled to be convened in August. Ms. Bland’s family has called for an independent autopsy.Investigations are underway by the F.B.I. and the Texas Rangers, an investigative unit in the Department of Public Safety. Representative Sheila Jackson Lee, Democrat of Texas, and others have also called on Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch to order a Justice Department inquiry.A growing cadre of Ms. Bland’s supporters, including friends and family, have said they find it inconceivable that she could have been contemplating taking her life after things seemed to be going her way.But Ms. Bland had posted a video to her Facebook page in March saying she was experiencing “a little bit of depression as well as PTSD,” or post-traumatic stress disorder. Family members have said they had no reason to believe she was seriously troubled.Ms. Bland’s case has generated enormous interest on social media at a time of seemingly incessant episodes involving minorities and the police. Many of her supporters have raised questions about the role race may have played in her arrest and death, in a county with a long history of racial discord.The Waller County sheriff, R. Glenn Smith, was suspended for two weeks without pay as Hempstead police chief in 2007 after allegations of racism were leveled against him and several other white officers, according to accounts in The Houston Chronicle and other news outlets.Sheriff Smith has strongly challenged suggestions that race was a factor in Ms. Bland’s death and has said his office is seeking to be as transparent as possible in assisting in the investigation. He also pointed out that members of the jail staff supervising Ms. Bland on the day of her death were either black or Hispanic.