http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/14/world/americas/prominent-opposition-leader-in-venezuela-is-blamed-for-unrest.html
Prominent Opposition Leader in Venezuela Is Blamed for Unrest - The New York Times
Caracas (Venezuela),Politics and Government,Lopez  Leopoldo,Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,Deaths (Fatalities),Maduro  Nicolas,Venezuela
Feb. 13, 2014
3021
CARACAS, Venezuela —  Top government officials on Thursday blamed a prominent opposition leader for unrest that resulted in three deaths, amid growing tension over antigovernment protests.A local newspaper, El Universal, posted on its website a photograph of what it said was an arrest order issued by a judge for the opposition leader, Leopoldo López, a Harvard-educated former mayor of a wealthy section of Caracas. It said he was accused of murder and terrorism, among other charges. Aides to Mr. López said they were trying to confirm the report.The violence came after thousands of government opponents on Wednesday took part in the largest protest march since the days immediately after the narrow election victory in April of President Nicolás Maduro. Mr. López, who spoke at the protest, has been active in organizing similar, though smaller, rallies throughout the country in recent weeks.The march, through the center of Caracas, unfolded peacefully, but afterward a few hundred young people, mostly men, stayed, and some threw rocks and chunks of concrete at the riot police, who responded with tear gas.At one point, the protesters, many with their faces covered by T-shirts or bandannas, threw projectiles at the headquarters of the national prosecutor’s office, breaking a few windows on the second floor of the concrete and glass skyscraper. Five police vehicles were set on fire nearby.During clashes near the prosecutor’s office and in a separate part of the city later in the day, three people were shot to death, officials said. Two were identified as protesters, and one was described as a government supporter. It was not clear who opened fire in each shooting, but each side blamed the other for the violence, with government officials naming Mr. López as the “intellectual author” of the unrest.“Mr. Leopoldo López directed a well-trained group of his followers toward the national prosecutor’s office, and once he had left the demonstration there began a coordinated and massive attack,” the foreign minister, Elías Jaua, said Thursday in a television interview, although he offered no proof. “We can no longer tolerate that this group acts with impunity, bathing the Venezuelan people in blood.”Mr. López, in an interview on CNN en Español on Wednesday night, denied any responsibility for the disturbances and said, “I have no doubt that the violence today was the responsibility of the government.”The shootings in the capital came as protests against the government, often headed by university students in smaller cities elsewhere in the country, had been building in recent days. Wednesday’s march was called to demand the release of several students arrested in the earlier protests.But the march included many who were not students, most of them longtime opponents of the socialist government, which was led for 14 years by Mr. Maduro’s predecessor, Hugo Chávez, who died last March.The recent marches have been fueled by growing discontent over issues like rampant violent crime, high inflation and shortages of basic goods, as well as the growing frustration of opponents of the government over being excluded from any form of power-sharing or role in setting policy.After the violence, government officials went on the offensive, portraying the events in often exaggerated terms.Mr. Maduro claimed that the demonstrators had destroyed the headquarters of the national prosecutor’s office, though the damage consisted largely of broken windows. He said the protesters were trained and attacked the police in a carefully organized fashion, when the scene on the street was chaotic and there was little, if any, sign of coordination.The clashes on Wednesday had their bizarre moments.The police who fired tear gas at protesters did not have gas masks to protect themselves from the gas. In any case, the gas appeared to be relatively weak, and its effects were limited.The police stayed well away from the rampaging youths around the prosecutor’s office until their vehicles were set afire. Then, plainclothes and uniformed officers rushed a small park in front of the office, grabbing people indiscriminately, pummeling them, pushing them to the ground and kicking them. Most of the protesters were gone by then, so many of those beaten by the police were news photographers and cameramen.On Wednesday night, television audiences could watch a special nationwide broadcast of Mr. Maduro as he attended a parade in honor of the country’s Youth Day. The parade included generals riding on tanks, female soldiers carrying swords and dressed in ornate red, black and gold uniforms with knee-high patent-leather boots, and children riding dirt bikes and skateboards.Afterward Mr. Maduro said the day’s violence was an attempt to overthrow his government.“I alert the world,” he said, draped in the yellow, blue and red presidential sash with a large gold badge like a giant sheriff’s star pinned to his left breast, “we are facing a planned coup d’état.”Local news media reported more protests in several cities on Thursday.