https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/10/world/asia/australia-to-accept-additional-12000-refugees-from-iraq-and-syria.html
Tony Abbott Says Australia Will Accept 12,000 More Refugees - The New York Times
Australia,Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Abbott  Tony,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Sept. 9, 2015
6539
Prime Minister Tony Abbott of Australia said on Wednesday that his country would take an additional 12,000 refugees from Iraq and Syria, and would join in an air campaign against Islamic State forces in Syria.“We have to act with our heads as well as our hearts,” Mr. Abbott said. “As a free and democratic country, we must stand against those who wish to destroy life and to build a terrorist state.”Australia will focus on taking in women, children and families who are members of persecuted minorities and who have sought refuge in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, Mr. Abbott said. It will also pay to support 240,000 people who have fled Iraq and Syria and are now living in neighboring countries, a cost expected to run $44 million Australian dollars, or $31 million.On Sunday, Mr. Abbott had said Australia would help with efforts to ease the migration crisis, without pledging to take any more refugees, prompting criticism from opposition politicians who said the government needed to do more. The quota of 12,000 exceeds a proposal from the opposition Labor Party, which recommended on Monday that Australia increase its resettlement allotment by 10,000 people.Australia currently resettles about 13,750 people annually under humanitarian visas, a number scheduled to increase to 18,750 by 2018-19. The 12,000 places will be in addition to that quota, Mr. Abbott’s office said.As a percentage of its population, Australia is the leading nation for resettlement of refugees under the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Abbott’s office said. But only about one of every 100 refugees worldwide is formally resettled in third countries.In recent years, Australia has taken a tough stance toward asylum seekers, turning back migrant ships from Southeast Asia and holding people in offshore detention centers. After the number of migrants from Bangladesh and Myanmar traveling by boat to Malaysia and other parts of Southeast Asia surged this spring, Mr. Abbott said Australia would not take in any of them.Australian forces that have been fighting against the Islamic State in Syria will now contribute to the American-led air campaign against the group in Syria, following requests of support from the Iraqi government and President Obama, Mr. Abbott’s office said.“The extension of the Australian Defense Force’s operations into Syria will help protect Iraq and its people from Daesh attacks inside Iraq and from across the border in Syria,” a government statement said, using an alternative name for the Islamic State.The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, said his party welcomed the decision to increase the refugee quota and also supported the expansion of airstrikes into Syria. But he sought to put curbs on the military operations, saying that they “have to be constrained to the collective self-defense of Iraq” and “what is necessary to halt these cross-border attacks.”The plan to do more for asylum seekers from Iraq and Syria follows increasing public concern about the large numbers of migrants arriving in Europe each day, and the risks that many of them face in making the journey.On Monday, Britain said it would accept 20,000 refugees from Syria over the next five years, and France said it would take 24,000 over the next two. Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, on Wednesday urged the European Union to take in a total of 160,000.