https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/01/us/uc-berkeley-milo-yiannopoulos-protest.html
Berkeley Cancels Milo Yiannopoulos Speech, and Donald Trump Tweets Outrage - The New York Times
Yiannopoulos  Milo,University of California  Berkeley,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Berkeley (Calif),Breitbart News Network LLC,Trump  Donald J
Feb. 1, 2017
6640
BERKELEY, Calif. — A speech by the divisive right-wing writer Milo Yiannopoulos at the University of California, Berkeley, was canceled on Wednesday night after demonstrators set fires and threw objects at buildings to protest his appearance.The university announced the cancellation on Twitter around 6 p.m. local time, about an hour after a section of the campus erupted in protest.All buildings on campus were locked down for several hours, and the university police said on Twitter that students should leave the area because of the “violent demonstration.” The lockdown was lifted around 10:55 p.m. local time.Early Thursday morning, President Trump spoke out against the university for canceling the event.In an appearance on “Fox and Friends” on Thursday, Kellyanne Conway, one of Mr. Trump’s top advisers, compared the protest to those that took place at airports across the country over the weekend in opposition to the president’s executive order on immigration.“I don’t even know if they know what they’re protesting,” she said. “Is it the free speech? Having someone maybe on your campus who has a dissenting point of view or wants to present an alternative point of view?”Gavin Newsom, the lieutenant governor of California and a former mayor of San Francisco, tweeted that he was “appalled” at Mr. Trump’s apparent threat to take away the university’s federal funding.Mr. Yiannopoulos, an editor at Breitbart News, is known for his gleeful attacks on political correctness that can sometimes veer into offensive and racially charged language. He has called feminism a “cancer” and Malala Yousafzai “schoolmarmish,” and as a gay immigrant says that he has faced backlash from other gay people when revealing his politics.His flamethrower approach has aroused a fierce backlash.He was barred from Twitter last year for inciting trolls to attack the “Ghostbusters” actress Leslie Jones.Ms. Jones was among those who spoke out last month when Mr. Yiannopoulos announced he had signed a book deal with Simon & Schuster that was said to be worth $250,000. The publisher defended its decision to publish Mr. Yiannopoulos in a letter to authors and attempted to reassure them that the book would not include hate speech. At least one author, Roxane Gay, pulled her next book from the publisher in response to its decision to work with Mr. Yiannopoulos.His scheduled speech at U.C. Davis last month devolved into a tense standoff between protesters and the police. It was called off before it could begin over security concerns.Mr. Yiannopoulos was invited by the Berkeley College Republicans, a student group that portrayed the event, which was to have been held Wednesday night, as a way to jolt the liberal campus with a different perspective.More than 100 faculty members called for blocking the event in a letter to Chancellor Nicholas Dirks. It cited a speech Mr. Yiannopoulos delivered at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee where he belittled a transgender student by name.On Twitter, the Berkeley campus police described the episode on Wednesday night as “major protest attacks” and urged people to stay away. Crowds lingered despite police orders to disperse.The university “deeply regrets” the cancellation of the event, said Dan Mogulof, a spokesman.Mr. Mogulof blamed the violence on outsiders whom he said disrupted what had been a peaceful protest.“This university was essentially invaded by more than 100 individuals clad in ninja-like uniforms who were armed and engaged in paramilitary tactics,” Mr. Mogulof said. “They were implementing a very clear plan to engage in violence, disruption and property destruction.”No serious injuries were reported, Mr. Mogulof said, and a tally of damage to the university and surrounding areas was still underway Thursday morning.On Facebook, Mr. Yiannopoulos said he had been evacuated from the campus after “violent left-wing protesters tore down barricades, lit fires, threw rocks and Roman candles at the windows and breached the ground floor of the building.”He added, “One thing we do know for sure: The Left is absolutely terrified of free speech and will do literally anything to shut it down.”After Berkeley, he had no future appearances scheduled, according to his website.