http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/31/us/bail-set-at-1-million-for-ex-university-of-cincinnati-officer-charged-with-murder.html
Ex-Officer in Cincinnati Makes Bail in Killing of Motorist - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Dubose  Samuel (1972-2015),Tensing  Ray (1989- ),University of Cincinnati,Colleges and Universities,Cincinnati (Ohio)
July 30, 2015
7404
Two University of Cincinnati police officers who were present when a colleague shot and killed a motorist were placed on paid leave, a university spokesman said Thursday, while a judge set bail of $1 million for the officer at the center of the case.That officer, Ray Tensing, appeared briefly in a Hamilton County court in Cincinnati, in gray-and-black striped jail garb, handcuffed behind his back, as his lawyer, William S. Mathews II, entered a plea of not guilty for him. Mr. Tensing, who has been fired by the university, was released from jail on bond later Thursday.On Wednesday, county prosecutors announced that a grand jury had indicted Mr. Tensing on charges of murder and manslaughter in the killing of Samuel DuBose on July 19 during a traffic stop for a missing license plate. They said it was the first time a law enforcement officer in the county had ever faced a murder charge for actions taken in the line of duty.The prosecutors also released a graphic and widely anticipated video of the shooting, taken by a body camera worn by the officer, which they said was crucial to the case, and showed that Mr. Tensing and possibly other officers had misrepresented what had happened.Officers Phillip Kidd and David Lindenschmidt were placed on leave pending the outcome of an internal investigation, a spokesman for the university, Lonnie Soury, said Thursday. Mr. Soury, a New York public-relations specialist brought in to help the university, described the move as “standard procedure.”Video taken from body cameras of Officers Kidd and Lindenschmidt was also released Thursday. In the videos, Mr. Tensing is heard saying to another officer, “He was dragging me,” to which the other officer responded “Yeah, I saw that.”Mr. Soury said the university was bringing in an outside company to conduct an investigation “of everything that transpired in this tragic incident.” He would not identify the company until a contract was signed, which he said was expected on Friday.In 2010, Officer Kidd was named as a defendant in a wrongful-death suit filed by the family of Kelly Brinson, alleging that Mr. Brinson, a psychiatric patient at the University Hospital, died of a heart attack after an encounter with the university police, who shocked him with a Taser stun gun.The university disputed the allegation, but the family settled the case for $638,000, according to Al Gerhardstein, a lawyer for the family. After the suit, he said, the hospital stopped using University of Cincinnati police officers for security on the hospital psychiatric ward. Officer Kidd was one of several officers who restrained Mr. Brinson, and was dropped as a defendant by the end of the case. Members of Mr. DuBose’s family were in the packed courtroom on Thursday for Mr. Tensing’s appearance, which lasted less than three minutes. He spoke only when asked by the judge if he understood what charges he faced, replying, “Yes, your honor.”Mr. Mathews said that there was no risk that Mr. Tensing would flee, and asked that the bail be “something reasonable,” while a prosecutor noted that bail is usually set at $1 million or more in murder cases.“The defendant is facing the possibility of life in prison,” Judge Megan E. Shanahan said. “It’s the court’s duty to ensure his appearance. The bond will be $1 million.”Some of the people in the courtroom applauded and shouted, drawing a rebuke from the judge. “Ladies and gentleman, this is a courtroom,” she said sharply. “You will conduct yourself at all times appropriately.”