https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/books/review/letters-to-the-editor.html
Letters to the Editor - The New York Times
Books and Literature
July 14, 2017
4418
To the Editor:In a By the Book interview (July 2), Don Winslow describes his difficulty with “As I Lay Dying” (“I’ve tried and tried and tried; I’ll try again”). He seems on track to follow Faulkner’s advice, in response to the question: “Some people say they can’t understand your writing, even after they read it two or three times. What approach would you suggest for them?” Faulkner replied, “Read it four times.”PHILIP KOPLIN SANTA BARBARA, CALIF.♦To the Editor:Readers of Miranda Seymour’s fine review of “An English Governess in the Great War,” the Brussels diary of Mary Thorp (July 2), might be interested to know that Belgium did not forget Herbert Hoover or the United States. The lovely little square called the Herbert Hooverplein lies next to the library of the University of Leuven (formerly Louvain), which was burned by the German occupying troops. It was rebuilt and restocked with contributions from many American schools, universities, libraries, foundations and other organizations whose names are commemorated on stone plaques that circle the exterior of the library’s first floor.EDWARD PETERS GUILFORD, CONN.♦To the Editor:The review of “The Color of Law,” by Richard Rothstein (June 25), may leave readers with the impression that there are no good remedies to decades of de jure segregation. It ignores an inexpensive remedy that has proved effective — adding mobility counseling to government-funded housing vouchers to help poor black families move to opportunity-rich, previously segregated communities. As Rothstein describes, in Chicago, Dallas and Baltimore, mobility programs have helped thousands of poor African-American families move to neighborhoods from which they had historically been excluded. Those moves have, belatedly, allowed these families to take advantage of the benefits of living in neighborhoods with better schools, jobs, parks and public safety. The results include higher high school graduation rates, college attendance, marriage rates and income (one large study showed a 31 percent increase in lifetime earnings for children who moved before their teens), and decreases in asthma, obesity, diabetes and depression. Similar programs should be instituted throughout the country.ANDREW D. FREEMAN BALTIMOREThe writer is the president of the board of the Baltimore Regional Housing Partnership.♦To the Editor:I always hope not to be tempted to respond to reviews. But Eric Foner’s review of my “Lincoln and the Abolitionists: John Quincy Adams, Slavery, and the Civil War” (June 25) is a special case. He and I have a fundamental disagreement about Lincoln, race, and slavery. He argues in “The Fiery Trial: Lincoln and American Slavery” (2010) that Lincoln’s views about race and slavery evolved over time. I made it clear in my review for The Washington Post that, despite that book’s merits, which are many, Foner’s main argument is unpersuasive: Lincoln always opposed slavery; he never favored citizenship for blacks, though he accepted some limited version as a necessary outcome of the war. Foner’s review of “Lincoln and the Abolitionists” restates the thesis of “The Fiery Trial.” It makes its case by numbers of misrepresentations of Lincoln and of what I’ve written. Lincoln’s greatness is not undermined by an attempt to see him clearly, with neither progressive nor idealistic blinkers, and neither Lincoln nor history benefits from Foner’s special pleading. Arguably our greatest president, Lincoln does not need to be vindicated or defended, and there is not the slightest bit of evidence on which to claim that Lincoln wanted or welcomed a biracial United States. My take on Lincoln, despite Foner’s claim, is deeply embedded in history, and of course racism “rises and falls over time.” But the evidence demonstrates that racism, at a fairly high level, has been a constant in American history.FRED KAPLAN BOOTHBAY, ME.♦To the Editor:In his review of “A Fine Mess,” by T. R. Reid (June 25), David Cay Johnston reminds us that all tax systems deserve regular reform. In Canada, we’re “celebrating” the 100th anniversary of an Income War Tax Act that was introduced in 1917 as a “temporary measure.” Obviously, another unkept political promise!Although the review doesn’t mention it, I suspect Reid described the simple and appealing measure that was introduced some years ago by Steve Forbes in his presidential campaign in 1996. I’m referring to the excellent idea of a “tax return on a postcard,” based on a flat tax, with a rate to be determined.Such a common-sense reform would immediately add millions of tax consultants, accountants and lawyers to the unemployment rolls. On the plus side, there’d be plenty of work for auditors.GEORGE DUNBAR TORONTOThe Book Review wants to hear from readers. Letters for publication should include the writer’s name, address and telephone number. Please address them to books@nytimes or to The Editor, The New York Times Book Review, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. Comments may also be posted on the Book Review’s Facebook page.Letters may be edited for length and clarity. We regret that we are unable to acknowledge letters.Information about subscriptions and submitting books for review may be found here.