http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/11/your-money/student-loan-co-signers-face-a-tangled-path-to-a-release.html
Student Loan Co-Signers Face a Tangled Path to a Release - The New York Times
Student Loans,Credit and Debt,Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
July 10, 2015
3776
Most students who take out private educational loans for college end up with a co-signer to help assure the lender that the loan will be paid if the borrower runs into financial trouble. But having the co-signer removed later can be a challenge.Private student loan lenders market the ability to have a co-signer released from the debt, after certain criteria are met. But about 90 percent of borrowers who request to have their co-signers released from their obligation are rejected, a recent report from the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau found.Further, it’s often difficult to obtain information about the criteria for securing a co-signer’s release and the process for requesting one, the report found, so many borrowers don’t even try.“There is no road map for borrowers,” said Seth Frotman, the bureau’s acting student loan ombudsman.The bureau, which relied on more than 3,000 complaints in preparing the report, declined to provide the data it used to arrive at the 90 percent rejection figure. A spokeswoman, Moira Vahey, said the number was based on a confidential survey sent to lenders active in the private loan market. The bureau, she said, “believes, based on its analysis and from responses it received, that this is representative of what’s happening in the marketplace.”Richard Castellano, a spokesman for Sallie Mae, one of the biggest private student loan lenders, said its co-signer release approval rate was “significantly higher” than the level cited in the report.The vast majority of student loans are made by the federal government and usually do not require a co-signer. But there are limits on the amount of federal loans that students can borrow, so some turn to private loans from banks and other lenders.Private loans require applicants to undergo a credit check, and students often need a co-signer — such as a parent or grandparent — to qualify. (Even if a co-signer isn’t required, lenders may offer a lower rate for having one.)The lack of a clear mechanism for securing a release can become a serious problem, for both borrowers and co-signers. While co-signers may think they are simply helping a student to borrow money, they must make payments if the primary borrower is late or misses a payment. Furthermore, the loan information appears on the co-signer’s credit report, and could affect his or her ability to apply for a mortgage or other kinds of loans.In some cases, when a co-signer dies or files for bankruptcy protection, the loans are automatically placed in default, or become due in full — even if the primary borrower is up to date on payments. Such “automatic defaults” were identified as an issue more than a year ago but continue to be a problem, particularly when loans are sold or securitized and are handled by a new servicer, according to the financial protection bureau.The Consumer Bankers Association said 98 percent of private loan borrowers were repaying their loans on time. “The students and their co-signers are to be commended for meeting their loan obligations,” Richard Hunt, the association’s chief executive, said in a statement.Criteria for a co-signer release might include making a year or more of consecutive on-time payments and passing a credit review. But some borrowers have found it difficult to find out the specific rules for their loan or have misunderstood the implications of making changes in their loan repayment plan. In some cases, for instance, having had a loan placed on “forbearance” status — in which monthly loan payments are temporarily suspended or reduced, usually because of financial hardship — at any time may permanently disqualify borrowers from a co-signer release.Sallie Mae, one of the largest private student loan lenders, includes its eligibility criteria and co-signer release application forms on its website.Other lenders, like Wells Fargo, may require borrowers to request forms individually.Jason Vasquez, a spokesman for Wells Fargo, said the bank considered factors like the borrower’s employment history and FICO score: “We look at each circumstance individually.” Reasons for rejecting an application, he said, might include the borrower’s failure to “make loan payments on time, every time.”Here are some questions and answers about getting a co-signer release:■ How can I apply for a co-signer release?Check with your servicer for its application form. If you have trouble getting information, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has suggested letter templates on its website.■ Do I have to wait until my lender notifies me that I’m eligible for a co-signer release?No. Lenders typically don’t notify borrowers if they are eligible. So if you think you meet the criteria, you should apply.■ Are there any changes in the works to help borrowers?In May, the bureau opened an inquiry into student loan servicing problems and is accepting comments through Monday. The inquiry could lead to new rules.