https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/02/world/asia/pakistan-protests-imran-khan.html
Pakistani Opposition Leader, Imran Khan, Calls Off Protest - The New York Times
Pakistan,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Khan  Imran,Sharif  Nawaz
Nov. 1, 2016
893
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — After days of police crackdowns on his supporters, Imran Khan, Pakistan’s opposition leader, on Tuesday called off his plan to shut down the Pakistani capital with street demonstrations, averting a potentially violent clash.Mr. Khan made the announcement after the Pakistani Supreme Court said it would form a judicial commission to investigate corruption allegations against Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, whose family members were named as holders of offshore bank accounts in leaked financial documents known as the Panama Papers. A five-member panel of the court asked Mr. Sharif to submit a written response to the allegations.Addressing supporters outside his residence in the capital, Islamabad, on Tuesday afternoon, Mr. Khan said that instead of logjamming Islamabad on Wednesday with his rally, he would celebrate.The announcement disappointed his supporters. For weeks, Mr. Khan had raised expectations that the protest would force Mr. Sharif to step down. Mr. Khan had claimed that one million of his supporters would reach the capital and clog the government machinery on Wednesday.But as the date approached, the government arrested at least 1,500 members of Mr. Khan’s party, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, in Punjab Province. And Mr. Khan failed to rally the rest of the country to his cause.On Monday, the police shut down roads and fired rubber bullets and tear gas at thousands of Mr. Khan’s supporters, preventing them from reaching Islamabad.Analysts and supporters of Mr. Khan say two factors forced him to pull back: a lack of widespread support and his decision to remain holed up at home during the police confrontations.“Timing is everything in politics,” said Faisal Sherjan, a supporter based in Karachi. “So is courage. You have to back up your rhetoric with action.”Referring to Mr. Khan’s party, he added: “PTI supporters are deeply disappointed. I am one of them.”In 2014, Mr. Khan led thousands of his protesters to stage a protest sit-in in the capital. But that protest also fizzled out after some months.Rehman Malik, a former interior minister and a member of the opposition Pakistan People’s Party, said in an interview that the latest showdown had been averted after the government and Mr. Khan’s party agreed on a face-saving arrangement for both sides behind the scenes.For his part, Mr. Khan tried to portray his retreat as a victory.“I tell you to go home and rest because you have to come back to Islamabad tomorrow,” Mr. Khan told his supporters. “We will put one million people together, and it will be a day of thanksgiving.”