https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/07/opinion/where-homeless-meets-crazy.html
Where Homeless Meets Crazy - The New York Times
Homeless Persons,India,Mental Health and Disorders,New York City,Chicago (Ill)
Nov. 6, 2015
8819
IN every corner of the world, there are people who are flagrantly ill, people who mutter to invisible others and box at the air. But because the cultural texture is different in different settings, the experience of madness can be quite different, too. That is true even of such a blunt assault on human feeling as homelessness.In India, for example, Madhu’s relatives dealt with her illness by abandoning her at a healing shrine. The anthropologist Giulia Mazza, who interviewed her in 2011, found that Madhu began to be harassed by what we call voices after marriage, a notoriously stressful time for young brides in India. Madhu heard Sonia Gandhi, the Congress Party leader, implore her to feed starving children. Ghosts taunted her: “Talk with us, give me that, give me this, open your full dress, I want to do sex with you.”Her husband (or his relatives) took her back to her mother’s house. Her voices seemed to bother her less than the fact that she couldn’t seem to work. She said: “Mad means she is not working in the house. Washing clothes I am not, combing my hair I am not, I am just lazy, lazy girl.” Her mother traveled with her to the healing temple.Madhu remembers dressing carefully for her audience with the baba, or priestly healer. She remembers that as she climbed the temple steps, she felt a great dizziness. Then her relatives disappeared. In the following years, she wandered the country by train, first to Mumbai, and then somehow to Chennai, hundreds of miles to the southeast.That was when the outreach team from an organization called the Banyan found her, hungry and filthy, crouching on the street. Since the Banyan was started in 1993, it has rescued over 1,500 women from the street. The group’s members wash, feed and medicate the women, and then they teach them to sew, cook and do other tasks. Families are more likely to take the women back if they come with medication and domestic skills. Over half the women have since been reunited with their kin.When I visited the Banyan, I was struck by how happy and grateful the women were. The atmosphere seemed so different from the palpable anger and fear in the shelters that catered to women with serious mental illness that I knew from working in Chicago. As I read interview after interview with the women at the Banyan, I was also struck by the absence of certain ideas about what it means to be crazy.A decade ago, my students and I spent hundreds of hours in a neighborhood known for its dense concentration of people with serious psychotic disorders, about 10 miles north of downtown Chicago. We hung out in the drop-in centers and in the shelters. We went to Salvation Army services and sat in the park.We learned that people used the word “crazy” to pick out those flagrantly psychotic people you can see on the street, and what the word meant to them was this: that people become “crazy” when they are too weak to deal with the challenge of living on the street. “The street,” one woman told me, “it will drive you to the brink of — it comes back to being mentally strong. I’m not gonna let that happen to me. It happens because there are women in the shelter who give up.”The challenge for the Banyan is to enable women to be useful to families who may not accept them back if they cannot work. In our country, it’s different.These days, because of our underfunded and fragmented mental health system, it is commonplace for people with psychosis to become periodically homeless. They get picked up by the police — our jails and prisons have become de facto psychiatric hospitals — and then they are released to the street again. There they often end up living in a street culture that teaches them that they become crazy only if they are weak. They distrust help, and they have learned that they should never admit to being ill.There are now more people who are homeless in New York City than at any time since the Great Depression. Most of them are members of families that live in shelters and are probably healthy (for the time being at least). They are homeless because of the lack of affordable housing. But among the single homeless, there are many with serious mental illnesses.Mayor Bill de Blasio’s plan is to put in place aggressive outreach teams that keep constant tabs on people who are ill. That plan will be more effective if the teams play down explicit diagnosis and minimize coercion. A large randomized trial recently found that when participants were simply given housing first, without strict requirements to accept psychiatric care, they were more likely to remain housed a year later.If psychotic homelessness were an easy problem to solve, we would have already done so. But we aren’t going to do so until we recognize that the streets in different places have their own cultures. To reach the people who need our help we need to understand what it means to be crazy in their world.