https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/14/business/dealbook/neil-gorsuch-chevron-deference.html
Should Agencies Decide Law? Doctrine May Be Tested at Gorsuch Hearing - The New York Times
Gorsuch  Neil M,Regulation and Deregulation of Industry,Supreme Court (US),Scalia  Antonin,Trump  Donald J,Law and Legislation,Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (2010)
March 14, 2017
8584
The confirmation hearing for the Supreme Court nominee, Judge Neil M. Gorsuch, is set for next week, and a sundry list of big issues is bound to be brought up.One involves an arcane legal doctrine known as Chevron deference, which many say will be crucial to the Trump administration’s plans to tame the regulatory state.Chevron deference, named after the legal case from which it arose, Chevron U.S.A. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, addresses what courts should do when Congress passes a law with an ambiguous interpretation.This happens more than you might think, involving laws from financial regulation to drug safety. The Dodd-Frank Act alone requires 390 rules to be promulgated, with the Volcker Rule by itself running 950 pages, including interpretations.In today’s regulatory world, agencies often step in to fill the gap, putting forth their own interpretation of a statute. The principle of the Chevron case says that a federal court will defer to a federal agency’s views. One rationale for this doctrine is that an agency, with its expertise, is better positioned than a judge to know a statute’s meaning.It may sound rather innocuous and bland, but it speaks to separation-of-power issues, as well as to how much power we want to give the administrative state, the array of federal agencies that administer and promulgate regulations.The Washington of today is not the government of the founders. In the time of George Washington, there were only three cabinet departments. Today, there are 15 cabinet-level departments, more than 430 agencies and other entities, and about 1.4 million civilian employees.This big bureaucracy is not necessarily a bad thing. The economy is much bigger and more complex than it was 200 years ago. A large and diverse economy needs regulation. And while the Trump administration has promised to reduce the bureaucracy as many presidents have before, it is hard to see the modern economy running without some degree of regulation, whether it concerns the security of banks or the safety of food and drugs.This is where Chevron deference comes in. Arguably, it transfers some power from the judicial branch to the administrative state, privileging its interpretations of the law, whether they involve alcohol containers or New York’s water supply.As a result, it has been criticized as “creating an unaccountable fourth branch” of government. And it has become the target of conservatives intent on reducing the power of regulators. The House even has a pending bill intended to get rid of Chevron deference.The doctrine is now in the spotlight because one of its most prominent critics is none other than Judge Gorsuch.His view is very different from that of the conservative giant he would replace on the bench, Justice Antonin Scalia, who died last year. Justice Scalia loved Chevron deference, arguing that “in the long run Chevron will endure” because it “accurately reflects the reality of government, and thus more adequately serves its needs.” Judges, in his view, are just not as capable as administrators in interpreting laws that the regulators themselves put into effect and know on a daily basis.Judge Gorsuch, however, came out swinging against the doctrine in an opinion last year on the grounds that it gave too much power to federal agencies.“Whatever the agency may be doing under Chevron, the problem remains that courts are not fulfilling their duty to interpret the law and declare invalid agency actions inconsistent with those interpretations in the cases and controversies that come before them,” Judge Gorsuch argued.The odd thing about this is that the Chevron doctrine was a creation of conservative government.In the case where the doctrine emerged, the National Resources Defense Council had challenged an Environmental Protection Agency rule during the Reagan administration, which had reversed a rule under the Carter administration that required all new plants at a single site to get a new permit under the Clean Air Act even if the plant did not increase overall emissions. The Reagan administration decision was made by no other than Judge Gorsuch’s mother, Anne M. Gorsuch, who then headed the E.P.A.The argument relied on the agency’s interpretation of a statute. A deputy solicitor general at the time, Paul Bator, argued that the court should defer to the administration, which favored a lighter regulatory touch. And the unanimous opinion by John Paul Stevens agreed — deregulation was off to the races.Chevron deference became legend in legal circles — it has now been cited more than 81,000 times. In 1986, as a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, Kenneth W. Starr called Chevron a “Magna Carta” for agency deregulation.Time passed, and the tables turned. President Ronald Reagan ran against big government, but the number of federal employees grew during his terms in office. And when Democrats were in the White House, a tool that had been used by agencies on behalf of deregulation was now used for more vigorous oversight and regulation.The Obama administration, for example, heavily relied on Chevron deference to justify the rules promulgated under the Affordable Care Act.That is what Judge Gorsuch’s view on Chevron comes down to: a conservative attempt to turn back the tide that conservatives created.Yet while Chevron deference is likely to come up at his confirmation hearing, it’s unclear what exactly the power of the doctrine actually is. What would happen if there was no such principle?Chevron deference is only one of many of these types of judicial doctrines of deference. There is the Seminole Rock doctrine, for example, which provides that agencies should be deferred to in the interpretation of their own rules.Will all of these tests of deference be thrown by the wayside? Even then, it appears that judges may often honor Chevron in the breach, with one study finding that the Supreme Court often ignored the doctrine.With or without Chevron, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit has lately had a field day overturning Securities and Exchange Commission rules. Indeed, judges often find a way to put forth their view of the law and overrule administrative agencies without citing Chevron or similar doctrines.More important, some who oppose the principle of Chevron seem to think it is a magical elixir that will tame what they see as too vast a bureaucracy. That seems silly — at its heart such a doctrine is merely a judicial tool. Whether the bureaucracy shrinks or grows depends on what Congress and the president do.And it seems fanciful to think we can live in such a complex world without regulators empowered to interpret regulation. Can you really have a financial economy today without rules and regulators who understand them?Chevron deference is all about who decides the law: agencies or judges. That’s an important question about the law and separation of powers. But it won’t end the federal administrative state or tame regulation by any means.