http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/26/world/americas/colombias-president-says-peace-talks-overcame-late-surprise.html
Colombia’s President Says Peace Talks Overcame Late Surprise  - The New York Times
Colombia,Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia,Santos  Juan Manuel,Londono  Rodrigo,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations
Sept. 25, 2015
1735
When President Juan Manuel Santos of Colombia met with the leader of his country’s largest guerrilla group this week to seal the outline of a deal to end more than five decades of war, he received an unsettling shock. At the last minute, he said, the rebel leader, Rodrigo Londoño, tried to back out of a crucial part of the newly negotiated framework.Mr. Santos said that in their first meeting ever, on Wednesday in Havana, Mr. Londoño, the leader of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, seemed to reject an agreement, negotiated just the night before, to set a six-month deadline for the signing of a final accord to end the war.Recalling the episode on Friday during an interview in New York, Mr. Santos said that Mr. Londoño questioned whether his negotiators had indeed agreed to the six-month timetable, which Mr. Santos considered essential to completing the negotiations. He told Mr. Londoño that he had flown to Havana that day only for the meeting because of the agreement on the timetable.Mr. Santos said that the two men called in the negotiating teams and Mr. Santos addressed the rebels’ lead negotiator. “I said: ‘What is this? Did you not inform this guy about the deadline?’ And he said, ‘Yes, we did.’ ”He said Mr. Londoño then reconsidered and agreed to go ahead. “That was a difficult moment,” Mr. Santos said with a wry smile.Mr. Santos said the rebel leader worried that the government would use the deadline to force the guerrillas to make concessions at the last minute, but he assured Mr. Londoño that he wanted only to speed up the end of the talks. That smoothed over the impasse.Besides the deadline, the two sides announced Wednesday that the rebels would begin to hand over their weapons 60 days after the signing of a final peace deal.And they said that according to their basic agreement, rebel leaders and military officers who had committed human rights violations and other egregious crimes during the war would be punished — a breakthrough on what had long been an obstacle to a final accord.Mr. Santos said that the punishment would include detention in a special site that he described as “an austere installation” but “not a typical jail with black-and-white pajamas.”Thousands of low-level FARC fighters would be granted an amnesty under the deal, but Mr. Santos said several dozen rebel leaders could be subject to the punishment, possibly including Mr. Londoño. The rebels would be required to confess to their crimes before a tribunal, and a failure to do so could lead to more severe punishment.On Friday, Human Rights Watch criticized the measure, saying it would “deny justice to thousands of victims of grave violations of human rights and humanitarian law by allowing their abusers to escape meaningful punishment.”Mr. Santos said that he had come to trust the FARC — a step that will be necessary for many Colombians if an eventual peace deal is to gain wide acceptance.“I have learned to believe in the sincerity of what the FARC wants,” Mr. Santos said, adding that he believed that “they want to lay down their arms and continue their struggle through peaceful means.”Many critical details still need to be worked out before a final deal is signed. And Mr. Santos said that winning over Colombians was another obstacle.Speaking in English, Mr. Santos, who wore a dove pin in his lapel, also talked about the crisis on the border of Colombia and Venezuela and his recent clashes with President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela.Mr. Maduro shut down several major border crossings last month and began deporting hundreds of Colombians, claiming that Colombian paramilitary fighters were part of a plot to kill him and were masterminding widespread smuggling that was hurting Venezuela’s economy.He accused the Colombian government of approving a plot to assassinate him, called Mr. Santos a liar and said Mr. Santos had “lost his senses.”“That’s nonsense,” Mr. Santos said in the interview on Friday, adding that he had told Mr. Maduro the same thing in a meeting on Monday.Asked how Mr. Maduro responded, Mr. Santos said, “He changed the subject.”Mr. Santos repeated earlier assertions that Venezuela had mistreated and violated the human rights of the deported Colombians. And, referring to his neighboring country’s economic crisis, he said, “Venezuela’s problems are made in Venezuela.”Mr. Santos avoided taking a clear position on the 14-year prison sentence handed down this month to Leopoldo López, a Venezuelan opposition politician whose trial on charges of inciting violence during antigovernment protests has been denounced by the United Nations and the Organization of American States as lacking in due process.“The Venezuelans claim that they did not violate his process,” Mr. Santos said. “I personally think that he should have been treated more fairly.”