https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/10/us/tulsa-police-shooting-betty-shelby-terence-crutcher.html
A Black Driver Was Fatally Shot; a White Officer Faces a Jury - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Tulsa (Okla),Shelby  Betty J (1974- ),Crutcher  Terence (1976- 2016),Blacks,Race and Ethnicity,Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides
May 10, 2017
2338
TULSA, Okla. — The prosecution and the defense agreed on this: On Sept. 16, 2016, a white police officer fatally shot a black driver on a street in north Tulsa.Beyond that, the two sides disagreed on why the shooting had taken place as they made their opening statements Wednesday in the manslaughter trial of Betty Jo Shelby, the Tulsa officer charged in the death of the driver, Terence Crutcher.The prosecutor, Kevin Gray, told jurors that Officer Shelby had panicked and used deadly force against an unarmed man who had his hands up.The officer’s lawyer, Shannon McMurray, countered that Officer Shelby had simply done what she had been trained to do when facing someone who refused to comply with her orders to stop and who could have been reaching for a gun.Officer Shelby sat stoically at the defense table Wednesday as her trial opened before a jury of three men and nine women. At least two of the women are black. Mr. Crutcher’s family took up three rows in the courtroom, sitting across from Officer Shelby’s family and a throng of reporters. Outside, a wall of cameras lined the hall.In his statement, Mr. Gray highlighted the note of panic in Ms. Shelby’s voice when she called in the shooting. That proved, he said, that she had overreacted.“You will hear her voice on that radio traffic. ‘Shots Fired!’ she will say,” Mr. Gray said, pausing. “Shots fired! You don’t need an officer to testify that you can tell a difference in her voice. You can hear it.”Ms. McMurray countered that the district attorney was the one who overreacted when he filed charges against the officer. During a recess, Ms. McMurray said that many commentators had tried to paint it as a case of racism, when it was actually a case of sexism: Officer Shelby was essentially on trial for being too emotional.To the jury, Ms. McMurray depicted her client as being an officer with a stellar record who fired her gun for the first time in her 10-year career at the same time that another officer discharged his Taser, because he also thought the victim could be reaching for a gun.The fatal shooting last September played out amid a series of deaths across the country at the hands of the police that have raised questions about officers’ use of force, particularly against African-American men.Officer Shelby, 43, was responding to a domestic violence call when she passed an intersection in north Tulsa and noticed Mr. Crutcher standing in the street and his S.U.V. partly blocking traffic. Officer Shelby told investigators that she asked Mr. Crutcher if the vehicle belonged to him and whether it was disabled, but he only mumbled to himself and did not answer.Mr. Crutcher, 40, kept putting his hands in his pockets, according to the account, even as Officer Shelby told him to show his hands. She fired when Mr. Crutcher reached into the driver’s side window. Video cameras in the police cars and the helicopter circling above recorded the encounter.Lawyers for Mr. Crutcher’s family have disputed some of the account. They said the window of Mr. Crutcher’s vehicle was up, not down, and so he could not have been reaching into the vehicle before he was shot.Pastors and community leaders say a public reaction that emphasized prayer over vengeance and a government response that emphasized transparency over secrecy has helped to ease tensions in the city.The Rev. Anthony L. Scott, senior pastor at First Baptist Church in North Tulsa, said the city’s relative calm had been the product of hard work on the part of church leaders and politicians, and the ties forged with the community as a whole.“I’m very thankful for the community’s passionate response and protest,” Mr. Scott said, “and also thankful that it didn’t escalate to the point of violence and rioting that it did in other cities.”Marq Lewis, organizer of the grass-roots group We the People of Oklahoma, agreed, but cautioned that Americans would be tuning in closely to the outcome of the trial.“People are seeing a person with a broken-down vehicle with his hands up and he’s dead — that’s what this means in the city,” Mr. Lewis said. “People feel if they have a breakdown they cannot call an officer for help.”Melvin Cooper, the senior pastor at World Won Ministries, a prominent African-American Pentecostal church, described Mr. Crutcher as “a nice young man,” who was the son of a minister. “I’m not saying he was perfect,” Mr. Cooper said.He joined the Rev. Tom Harrison of Asbury United Methodist Church, one of Tulsa’s largest congregations, in organizing a prayer service that included a former Tulsa police officer.“It’s like marriage counseling,” Mr. Harrison said, describing the interaction of the community with the former officer as a moment of both pain and love.Tulsa’s thorny history of racial injustice can be counted as among the most perilous in America. In 1921, a white mob killed 150 to 300 black people and destroyed 1,100 homes and businesses.In April 2015, a Tulsa County reserve deputy fatally shot an unarmed African-American man, Eric Harris, during an arrest. The deputy, Robert Bates, 73, testified that he had meant to draw his Taser, rather than his gun. Mr. Bates was convicted last year of second-degree manslaughter and sentenced to four years in prison and nine months of probation.Days after Mr. Crutcher’s shooting, city officials released police videos first to the victim’s family and later to more than 50 black leaders, pastors and officials. The mayor at the time, Dewey F. Bartlett Jr., and the police chief, Chuck Jordan, who are both white, apologized and answered questions on behalf of the city.Mr. Bartlett said that in his eight years as mayor, he and his wife had attended about 300 services throughout the city, including about 30 at black churches. “As a consequence of that, over the years, we developed a very true friendship, not just a political relationship, with many of the pastors,” Mr. Bartlett said.The city took another step in the healing process on Wednesday night with a large prayer service. The trial is expected to last at least into next week.