https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/podcasts/the-daily/oppo-donald-trump-jr-russia.html
‘The Daily’: The Dark Art of Opposition Research - The New York Times
The Daily,Russian Interference in 2016 US Elections and Ties to Trump Associates,Trump  Donald J Jr,Presidential Election of 2016,United States Politics and Government
July 13, 2017
3571
Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via StitcherOpposition research was the secret force behind articles on John Edwards’s $400 haircut and Mitt Romney’s decision to put the family dog on the roof of his car.Now, Donald Trump Jr. says it motivated him to meet with a Russian lawyer.On today’s episode:We discuss the history and logistics of digging up dirt on political opponents with Jonathan Martin, our national political correspondent, and put in perspective whether Mr. Trump’s meeting was politics as usual.We also talk with someone with firsthand knowledge of the practice: Ben LaBolt, the national press secretary for President Barack Obama’s re-election campaign.Background reading:• Campaign opposition research is standard, Mr. Martin writes. But “oppo” from hostile nations isn't.• A historical “oppo” refresher: Mr. Romney’s car elevator | John Edwards’s haircut | George W. Bush’s drunken-driving chargeTune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb.If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.On your iPhone or iPad:Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “The Daily.”)Once you’re on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)On your Android phone or tablet:You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)From a desktop or laptop:Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”On Google Home:You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times news” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”