https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/09/world/asia/north-korea-phone-hacking.html
South Korea Accuses North of Hacking Senior Officials’ Phones - The New York Times
North Korea,South Korea,Cyberwarfare and Defense,Nuclear Weapons,Cellular Telephones,Smartphones,Kim Jong-un,Sony Pictures Entertainment,National Intelligence Service (South Korea)
March 8, 2016
5098
SEOUL, South Korea —  Nearly a year and a half after North Korea was accused of mounting a sophisticated cyberattack against Sony Pictures Entertainment, South Korea’s intelligence agency accused the country of hacking into the smartphones of dozens of senior government officials, and suggested that the North could be preparing a major cyberattack.The early descriptions provided by the agency, the National Intelligence Service, indicated that the cyberattacks directed at South Korean officials were not as sophisticated, or destructive, as the attack on Sony in late 2014. That assault left 70 percent of Sony’s computers inoperable. The South Korean attack — or at least the first stage of it — involved stealing text messages, contact information and voice conversations, seemingly more focused on espionage than on destruction.Yet the agency said that South Korea faced a growing threat of major online attacks from the North, possibly in retaliation for the latest international sanctions over Pyongyang’s nuclear arms and missile programs. Seoul imposed new sanctions of its own against North Korea on Tuesday, including a ban on ships that have stopped in North Korea within the past six months.Perhaps the most notable part of the announcement by the agency was the disclosure that North Korean hackers had successfully gained access to the network of a company that provides security software for an online banking system used by more than 20 million South Koreans. That is often the prelude to larger attacks, and the North is believed to have been behind several attacks on banks, government websites and media companies in the South since 2008.In this case, the agency said that the attack on the security firm took place in February, and was detected early. It said there was no major disruption to banking services. But that assumes the North would conduct its attack right away, rather than waiting to mount a larger operation — which is what it did in the Sony case, which took months to engineer.North Korea has increasingly turned to cyberweapons as a way of exacting a price on its adversaries without provoking a major counterattack. It is under particular pressure now after its fourth nuclear test, which it claimed involved a hydrogen bomb. American officials have said there was no evidence a hydrogen weapon was involved.But the Pentagon has also warned that the impoverished North might see hacking attacks as “a cost-effective way to develop asymmetric, deniable military options.”While that nuclear test provoked United Nations sanctions, passed last week, countries have been uncertain how to respond to cyberattacks. Whatever price the North paid for the Sony assault appeared to be fairly modest. Nonetheless, its cyberwarfare units appeared to stand down for much of 2015.But between late February and early March of this year, the agency said, North Korea tried to infiltrate the smartphones of senior South Korean officials by sending them text messages designed to activate a virus. About 20 percent of those phones were infected with the virus, according to the agency, which did not identify the officials.The intelligence service did not explain how it had concluded that North Korea was responsible.South Korea has been a leading advocate for the tougher penalties on the North, to cut the funding that enables it to keep its weapons program alive. Many of the new United Nations sanctions single out luxury goods, which analysts believe are used to ensure the loyalty of the North’s ruling elite.Yet for the past several years, South Korea rarely imposed unilateral sanctions. The ban it announced on Tuesday would prohibit all ships visiting North Korea from making port calls in the South for six months. Japan announced a similar measure last month.Last year, 66 ships from other countries made a total of 104 port calls in South Korea after visiting the North, carrying steel and other goods, the government said. South Korea also said that 40 individuals and 30 entities, most of them North Korean, would be prohibited from financial transactions with the South because of ties to Pyongyang’s weapons programs. It also urged its people not to eat at any of the 130 restaurants abroad that North Korea runs to earn foreign currency.Seoul had already banned most direct trade with North Korea after the sinking of a navy ship in 2010, which it attributed to  a North Korean torpedo attack. On Wednesday, Pyongyang’s state-run news agency quoted North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, as boasting that the country possessed standardized small nuclear warheads for ballistic missiles.The North said last year that it had already begun building small nuclear weapons. Such claims carried in the nation’s propaganda-filled media are impossible to confirm independently.