https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/03/nytnow/how-to-get-the-most-out-of-your-new-york-times-subscription.html
9 Ways to Get the Most Out of Your Times Subscription - The New York Times
New York Times,Mobile Applications
April 3, 2017
7152
The New York Times publishes as many as 200 stories a day. Our correspondents were on the ground in more than 160 countries last year, and in every state. Their work includes authoritative coverage of current affairs, the arts and business, as well as guidance on how to live a smarter, more cultured life.Your subscription gives you access to all of it. Where should you start?We asked people who know The Times best — our reporters and editors — for tips. Here’s what they suggested:1. Download our news app to your phone or tablet. And don’t forget to log in, whether using the app or visiting the Times homepage on your computer. If you haven’t already, you can subscribe here.2. Once the app is installed, you can enable notifications about breaking news and other major coverage, as well as specific topics like politics and sports. To manage your notifications in the app, tap the bell (iOS) or three dots (Android) in the top right corner.3. The Morning Briefing tells you what you need to know to start your day. Sign up to receive it in your inbox, Sunday through Friday.4. Times editors curate dozens of newsletters, from The Interpreter’s expert international coverage to the conversation on race in America at Race/Related. See previews of each of our 40+ newsletters and sign up here.5. Subscribe to our podcasts on iTunes. On “The Daily,” for example, one of our most accomplished reporters brings context and analysis to the biggest stories of the day.6. Follow us on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. We also have some topical accounts, such as Science on Facebook and Food on Instagram. Here’s a list of all of our newsroom reporters and editors who use Twitter.7. Take a look at some of our other apps and services: NYT Cooking or our new web app and newsletter, Watching, for TV show and movie recommendations. There’s also NYT VR, our virtual reality app.8. Check out some of our Well guides to get moving and be more healthy. We have one to help you try yoga, or just get a better night’s sleep.9. Finally, have some fun: Stretch your brain with the Daily Crossword, or take a quick break with the Mini.