https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/12/world/europe/germany-afghan-migrant-murder.html
A Murder Taps Into Germany’s Conflicted Relations With Migrants - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Hushmand  Mehdi,Germany,Afghanistan,Iran,Immigration and Emigration,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Celle (Germany)
April 11, 2016
5588
CELLE, Germany — An immigrant from Iran, Mehdi Hushmand was a beloved high school science teacher known for his devotion, and for going out of his way to help settle some of Germany’s newer immigrants — the more than one million migrants and refugees who arrived en masse last year.So it was a big deal here in Celle when Mr. Hushmand was found bludgeoned to death in the basement of his home in February. But the shock was bigger still when the prime suspect turned out to be a recently arrived migrant from Afghanistan whom he had befriended.News of the murder and the still murky motive behind it have unsettled this orderly town of about 70,000 in the German heartland near Hanover, with its quaint timbered buildings and proud history as an ancestral home of the Windsor nobles who became Britain’s royal family.But it has also tapped into Germany’s larger, naggingly uncomfortable relationship with migration — its sometimes strange and unfamiliar story lines, its quiet successes and potential perils — at a moment when the country is struggling to integrate its new arrivals.Two months after the murder — after the late winter weather had toppled the votive candles left on Mr. Hushmand’s doorstep by grieving students, and faded the roses to sepia — Celle is a tiny capsule of a conflicted Germany.Residents are consoled, they say, that a potential killer has been caught, but they are also concerned and divided about the uncertainties of the future they have invited into their quiet town.“Of course we all talk about it,” said Oliver Spiess, 53, who lives in the same neighborhood as the teacher did. “For a small town like Celle, this is really unusual, and murder is a serious matter.”The mayor, Dirk-Ulrich Mende, still boasts that Celle, perhaps alone in Germany, applied to set up a refugee center in a barracks abandoned by the British after the Cold War ended. It expects to take in some 500 more refugees by August, on top of the 3,000 or so who live here already.But comments on the website of the local newspaper, which has a special section devoted to experience with the refugees, have hinted at suspicions and resentments bubbling below the surface of Celle’s seeming embrace of the newcomers.“You read a lot about the refugees when it’s positive,” Sebastian Nitz, a 29-year-old roofer, said. “Like a refugee found money and returned it. But heaven forbid someone does something bad. If you report at all, then it should be everything.”“No one is really enthusiastic about the refugees,” added Mr. Nitz, who was reached by telephone after complaining on the newspaper’s website that it had failed to mention that the murder suspect was a refugee and suggested it was “muzzled.”Initially, the police in Celle and state prosecutors kept the fact that the suspect was a refugee under wraps.The police spokesman, Thorsten Wallheinke, suggested the step was justified under federal guidelines that allow the authorities to withhold the ethnic or other identifying details of a suspect if they are deemed irrelevant to a case.For his part, the mayor insisted that the refugee background was not necessarily material to the killing, and that “people here in Celle have dealt with this.”Nevertheless, he said, he had disagreed with keeping the background of the suspect secret, and asked state prosecutors to make it public, which they eventually did within a day. “Otherwise,” he said, “I was afraid it would become a big theme.”That is what happened after hundreds of New Year’s Eve sexual assaults in Cologne and other cities, when the police initially failed to describe the attackers as mostly migrant men of North African or Arab origin.But in Celle, whether the background of the unidentified suspect, and the victim, is entirely irrelevant is not wholly clear.Mr. Hushmand arrived in Germany in 1979, another time of Mideast turmoil, when he was 19 and had fled his native Tehran as the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini built the Islamic Republic of Iran.As time passed, Mr. Hushmand acquired all the basic accouterments of a German life: a college degree, citizenship and the coveted status of Beamte, or civil servant, as a teacher of math and science.As more than a million migrants and refugees descended on Germany last year, Mr. Hushmand proved particularly useful as a translator, said Werner Gläser, a close friend and retired teacher.Mr. Hushmand’s native Farsi is very close to Dari, one main language in Afghanistan, which after Syria and Iraq was a main source of migrants arriving in 2015.Among those migrants, the authorities say, was a 58-year-old Afghan who landed at Celle’s refugee facility last fall with his wife and six children and moved into an apartment in January.Mr. Hushmand took the family under his wing, said Mr. Gläser, relating that the wife was very sick, and that, in keeping with his habit, Mr. Hushmand had visited her in the hospital. He also bought shoes for the children, Mr. Gläser said.“Mehdi had been a refugee himself,” he said. “He knew how hard it is to be a stranger in a totally strange land.”In late March, however, the police disclosed that the Afghan had confessed to the murder and told them that he had acted because Mr. Hushmand — divorced and childless at 55 — insisted on marrying the refugee’s 19-year-old daughter.The Afghan had gone to Mr. Hushmand’s home to discuss the matter and a fierce quarrel ensued, ending in the deadly attack on the teacher, according to the state prosecutor, Lars Janssen.Mr. Janssen stressed in a telephone interview that the police had no evidence of a relationship between the teacher and the young woman.Mr. Gläser, the teacher’s friend, was dumbfounded. “Complete rubbish,” he said.Later, after talking with others who knew Mr. Hushmand well, Mr. Gläser said the only likely explanation was that the teacher had offered to marry the young woman so that her family would definitely be able to stay in Germany.In a measure of the affection for Mr. Hushmand, a crowd of some 500 to 600 people attended a three-hour memorial organized by friends after his body was found.Mr. Mende, the mayor, said that despite the tragedy, his town was still generally responding well to the refugees. Residents had even pledged to continue caring for the Afghan family.Friends collected some 4,000 euros to fly Mr. Hushmand’s body to Tehran, fulfilling his known wish to be buried there. They have agreed to give the little money left over to care for refugees under 18, Mr. Gläser said.“That,” he said, “would be in Mehdi’s spirit.”