http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/26/nyregion/sandy-hook-shooting-investigation-ends-with-motive-still-unknown.html
Chilling Look at Newtown Killer, but No ‘Why’ - The New York Times
Newtown  Conn  Shooting (2012),Sandy Hook Elementary School (Newtown  Conn),Lanza  Adam,Newtown (Conn)
Nov. 25, 2013
6612
NEWTOWN, Conn. — Adam Lanza spent the final months of his life mostly alone in his bedroom. His windows were covered with black trash bags. He was preoccupied with violent video games and created a spreadsheet of some of the worst massacres in American history.Mr. Lanza refused to speak even to his mother, communicating with her only by email, even though their bedrooms shared the same floor of their house on Yogananda Street.He would not eat unless his food was arranged in a particular way on his plate. He hated birthdays and holidays, and forbade his mother from putting up a Christmas tree.He also made her get rid of a cat he did not like.No one else was allowed into his room, including his mother, who nevertheless did her son’s laundry daily because he changed his clothes often.Among their few outings together were trips to the shooting range. She planned to buy him a gun for Christmas last year.Mr. Lanza, 20, could not connect with people but obsessed over “Dance Dance Revolution,” an interactive video game he played in the lobby of a nearby movie theater, spending as long as 10 hours at a time trying to follow dance routines as they flashed on the screen.Last year, four days before her son killed 20 first graders and six adults at Sandy Hook Elementary School and then shot himself, Ms. Lanza cooked him some of his favorite meals and then left for a three-day trip to New Hampshire.Ms. Lanza returned on Dec. 13 at 10 p.m.The next morning, her son shot and killed her in her bed.A 48-page report released on Monday by the state’s attorney in Danbury, Stephen J. Sedensky III, offers a vivid and chilling portrait of the young man responsible for one of the nation’s worst mass shootings, and chronicles his rampage in the school.But what it does not answer is why.The long-awaited report does not suggest a motive for Mr. Lanza’s actions, even as it offers a glimpse into his strange, troubled life. It comes nearly a year after the shooting set off a national discussion about gun control, mental health and violence in American popular culture.In that time, families of the Sandy Hook Elementary victims have struggled to put their lives back together, the town has tried to heal and the school has been razed. But, until Monday, little information compiled by investigators had been publicly released.Even basic facts, like the path Mr. Lanza took inside the school, were kept secret.After the shooting, the Connecticut General Assembly passed bills to limit what could be made public. The state also fought to prevent the release of the recordings of the emergency calls to 911 from people inside the school. At a hearing on Monday before the report’s release, Judge Eliot Prescott of New Britain Superior Court said that he would review the tapes and soon decide whether to release them.The report was based on voluminous evidence and interviews conducted by the Connecticut State Police and the state’s attorney’s office, along with federal authorities. It marks the end of the investigation.Investigators struggled to make sense of “contradictory” descriptions of Mr. Lanza by those who knew him.The report notes that while “significant mental health issues” affected his ability to live a normal life and interact with others, it remained unclear if they contributed in any way to his actions last December. Mr. Lanza received a diagnosis in 2005 of an autism variant known as Asperger’s syndrome, but there is no evidence that people with Asperger’s are more likely than others to commit violent crimes.Mr. Lanza was treated by mental health professionals, according to the report, but none of them saw anything that predicted his future behavior.“Tutoring, desensitization and medication were recommended,” the report said. “The shooter refused to take suggested medication and did not engage in suggested behavior therapies.”There were reports of troubling behavior as early as the fifth grade, when Mr. Lanza produced “The Big Book of Granny” for a class project. The main character had a gun in her cane and shot people.In 2006, as a seventh grader, Mr. Lanza was described by a teacher as intelligent but obsessed with violent imagery.His mother noted a change in his behavior around that time. He stopped riding his bicycle or climbing trees. He no longer showed interest in his saxophone, dropping out of a school band. His life turned increasingly inward.Investigators found a wealth of disturbing digital evidence at the Lanza home, but were not able to recover any information from one hard drive that he had destroyed.Mr. Lanza had two videos showing suicide by gunshot, a five-second video dramatization showing a child being shot, and images of Mr. Lanza himself holding a gun to his head.He collected information on gun violence, including newspaper articles from 1891 “pertaining to the shooting of schoolchildren,” the report said. He used spreadsheets to chronicle mass shootings. He also had “materials regarding the topic of pedophilia and advocating for the rights for pedophiles.” The report made a point of noting that the materials were not child pornography, and the report did not otherwise address pedophilia.Mr. Lanza was enthralled by violent video games, including one called “School Shooting,” a modified version of another online game.His mother, Nancy Lanza, who separated from his father, Peter Lanza, in 2001, lived alone with Adam. She was concerned about him, saying she could not have a job because he required her constant attention. It was unclear how aware Ms. Lanza was of his strong interest in death and violence, and she continued to provide him with weapons.“The mother wanted to buy the shooter a CZ-83 pistol for Christmas and had prepared a check for that purchase to give the shooter,” the report said. “The mother never expressed fear of the shooter, for her own safety or that of anyone else.”An associate of the father said Peter Lanza, a tax director for the energy and finance division of General Electric in Stamford, was baffled by his son’s attitude toward him, and every attempt to reach out to the son was rejected. The two had not spoken in two years, said the associate, who asked for anonymity because he did not want to be identified with the attack.As details of the report were made public, there was disbelief expressed by some people that Ms. Lanza could not have been aware of the darkness building within her son.Michele Gay, whose daughter Josephine was killed at the school, read the report and said of Mr. Lanza’s bizarre behavior: “You would want treatment for someone like that. The problem here is that he was completely isolated from anyone but his mother, and the mother did not have the ability or understanding to help her son.” Ms. Gay said she found it particularly hard to fathom why Ms. Lanza would want to give her son a gun for Christmas.By 2012, the report said, Mr. Lanza was also estranged from his older brother, Ryan, who had also moved away. Ms. Lanza was planning to move from Newtown, possibly to Washington or to North Carolina, with Adam. To prepare the house for sale, she intended to buy a recreational vehicle for Adam to sleep in because he refused to go to a hotel.Mr. Lanza carefully planned his attack. According to information from a GPS device he owned, he drove to the vicinity of the school one day before the assault, while his mother was out of town.When he went to Sandy Hook Elementary on Dec. 14, he was armed with 30-round magazines for a Bushmaster .223-caliber rifle, along with several other weapons. Shortly after 9:30 a.m., he blasted his way through the plate-glass window at the locked front entrance.In less than 10 minutes, Mr. Lanza fired 154 rounds from the rifle, killing the 26 children and staff members. At 9:40, he took his own life with a pistol.“He was wearing a pale green pocket vest over a black polo-style short-sleeve shirt over a black T-shirt,” the report said. “He had yellow-colored earplugs in each ear. He was wearing black cargo pocket pants, black socks, black sneakers, a black canvas belt and black fingerless gloves on each hand. He had an empty camouflage drop holster that was affixed to his right thigh.”Relatives of the victims were permitted to view a draft of the report earlier this month.After nearly a year of speaking with investigators, sharing stories with other families of victims and endless news media accounts, some said there was little surprising in the draft report. The family of Victoria Soto, a first-grade teacher whom Mr. Lanza killed as she tried to keep her students out of the line of fire, released a statement noting that there were some questions that could never be answered.“While others search for the answer as to why this happened, we search for the how,” the statement read. “How can we live without Vicki?“So, yes, we have read the report. No, we cannot make sense of why it happened. We don’t know if anyone ever will. We don’t know if we will ever be whole again. We don’t know if we will go a day without pain. We don’t know if anything will ever make sense again.”