https://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/10/world/middleeast/deadly-shelling-strikes-syrian-city-of-daraa-activists-say.html
Deadly Shelling Strikes Syrian City of Dara’a, Activists say - The New York Times
Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),Syria,Assad  Bashar al-
June 9, 2012
2925
ANTAKYA, Turkey — Activists reported new violence in southwest Syria on Saturday, saying shelling by troops and clashes between soldiers and rebel fighters in the city of Dara’a had killed 17 people, including women and children.The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, an opposition group based in London with a network of contacts in Syria, said the victims from the violence early on Saturday included 10 women, a 10-year-old girl and two teenage boys. Telephone service, including cellphone networks, had been cut off, the organization said.Dara’a, near the border with Jordan, is where the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad’s government began in March last year.In the capital, Damascus, residents on Saturday reported a night of shooting and explosions in the worst violence there since the uprising began, The Associated Press said. For the first time, witnesses said, government tanks opened fire in Damascus, and for nearly 12 hours government forces clashed with armed rebels, who had previously kept a low profile in the capital, The A.P. reported.The violence in Dara’a and Damascus was another blow to efforts by Kofi Annan, the special envoy of the United Nations and the Arab League, to forge a peace. A cease-fire brokered by Mr. Annan went into effect on April 12, but the government and the rebels have consistently violated it.In Moscow, Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov of Russia said Saturday that Moscow still saw the cease-fire plan as relevant, despite the mounting violence, and continued to oppose direct foreign intervention in Syria. But he acknowledged the gravity of the most recent developments, saying that the situation “is becoming more alarming.”“One gets the impression that Syria is on the verge of a full-scale civil conflict,” Mr. Lavrov said.Saturday’s reports of violence came a day after United Nations monitors in Syria collected evidence of a mass atrocity in Qubeir, a desolate hamlet about 20 miles west of Hama. Activists say up to 78 people, including women and children, were shot, hacked and burned to death there on Wednesday. They blame the government, which denies responsibility.On Saturday, the monitors issued a video from the scene showing images of bloodstained rooms and mattresses, walls marked with bullet holes and interviews with sobbing residents.The violence in Damascus was a shift in the uprising, since it has been quiet compared with other Syrian cities. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported clashes in at least three Damascus neighborhoods.“Yesterday was a turning point in the conflict,” Maath al-Shami, an opposition activist in the capital, told The A.P. “There were clashes in Damascus that lasted hours. The battle is in Damascus now.” He said that at least four people had been killed.In Turkey, members of Syria’s main opposition group in exile, the Syrian National Council, elected Abdelbasset Sida, a Kurdish activist, as its leader on Sunday, Reuters reported. Many Syrians say the group’s members have been fixated more on positioning themselves for jobs in a new government than on forging the unity needed to defeat the Assad government.