https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/30/fashion/chloe-clare-waight-keller.html
New Year, New Designer Moves: Chloé Confirms Clare Waight Keller’s Exit - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Waight Keller  Clare,Chloe (Fashion Label),Compagnie Financiere Richemont SA
Jan. 30, 2017
9342
New year, new designer turnover.After weeks of speculation that the creative director of Chloé, Clare Waight Keller, was leaving after six years, and “no comment” responses from executives, the French fashion house finally confirmed her departure on Monday. Her last collection for the house will be shown at Paris Fashion Week on March 2, and a successor has not yet been announced.“Clare has been a remarkable partner at Chloé over the past six years,” Geoffroy de la Bourdonnaye, chief executive of the company, said in a statement. “She helped rejuvenate the legacy of Gaby Aghion, the first ever Chloé girl, by infusing a cool and easy breeze into the Chloé wardrobe, effortlessly mixing graceful and feminine ‘flou’ with a freewheeling and boyish take on tailoring.”Ms. Waight Keller, a Briton, joined Chloé from Pringle of Scotland in 2011, after designers including Paulo Melim Andersson and Hannah MacGibbon tried, unsuccessfully, to recapture the retail magic the brand enjoyed under the designer Phoebe Philo, who left in 2006. Ms. Waight Keller, whose soft-spoken mien belies a tough core, rejuvenated the house with a highly wearable and bohemian flair as well as a successful high profit margin accessories business.In an interim report for the six months ended Sept. 30, Chloé’s parent company, Compagnie Financière Richemont, reported “good sales growth,” but it did not provide financial numbers for its individual luxury brands, which also include Cartier and Van Cleef & Arpels.In the report, Mr. de la Bourdonnaye cited the “Drew” bag as having contributed to a strong performance by Chloé accessories.But sales at Richemont in the six months ended Sept. 30 were down 12.6 percent, to 5.1 billion euros, or $5.4 billion at current exchange rates, from the year-earlier period as a result of falling demand across all regions, underscoring the challenging times facing luxury companies.Chloé did not give a reason for Ms. Waight Keller’s departure, but her family moved to London from Paris last year, and she has been dividing her time between the two cities.That she is returning home despite Chloé’s success is sure to fuel speculation that she chose her family and personal life over the relentless hamster wheel of fashion’s multiplying seasons — a favorite narrative in fashion today. But given that Raf Simons, for example, whose departure from Dior in 2015 was widely (and wrongly) attributed to a desire for time out, shortly thereafter announced a move to the creative top of the behemoth Calvin Klein, it is possible Ms. Waight Keller, too, has a job in the offing.Which means that while one set of whispers from the rampant fashion rumor mill have ended, more will spring up — not only speculation about what Ms. Waight Keller might do next but also around who will get her job at Chloé.According to WWD, the answer is Natacha Ramsay-Levi, a longtime associate of Nicolas Ghesquière, artistic director of women’s collections at Louis Vuitton. Ms. Ramsay-Levi, a senior director at Louis Vuitton, also worked with Mr. Ghesquière at Balenciaga, where he was at the creative helm for 15 years.Should Ms. Ramsay-Levi be named to the post, it would present yet another change for the brand, away from Ms. Waight Keller’s soft-focus  cool, and into a harder-edge, more techno-hip aesthetic.It would also fuel (yet more) speculation that Mr. Ghesquière is considering leaving Vuitton. But let’s leave that gossip for another day.In an acknowledgment of a rare amicable parting of ways between designer and brand, Chloé plans to host a party for Ms. Waight Keller on the evening after her autumn/winter 2017 collection show.It will be a final departure, not only for Ms. Waight Keller but also from recent industry practice, with brands more often than not allowing designer-leaving rumors to fester through a maybe-or-maybe-not final show, casting an ambiguous pall over the event for critics and retailers. It recasts the last collection as the celebratory closing of one chapter and the start of another.Hopefully, given the rate of designer churn, it might even be a new trend.