https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/06/world/asia/south-korea-nuclear-power.html
Bitter Debate Over Nuclear Power Simmers in Rural South Korea - The New York Times
Nuclear Energy,Yeongdeok (South Korea),South Korea,Rural Areas,Nuclear Wastes
Jan. 5, 2016
1582
YEONGDEOK, South Korea —  Visitors to this idyllic stretch of coast marvel at the landscapes of emerald sea crashing against steep bluffs and undulating hills quilted with green pines. They stop at seaside restaurants with cheerful red signs advertising the local delicacy, known as bamboo crab, and watch trawlers sail back to picturesque fishing villages.Yet for many of the people who actually make Yeongdeok (pronounced Young-duck) their home, life has become increasingly gloomy — and solitary. Young people leave to pursue careers in distant cities, and years of overfishing has led to skimpier catches. On weekdays, when the tourists and sightseers have left, loneliness descends.So in 2010, the 399 mostly older people who made up the population of three villages agreed to give up their land and their centuries-old way of life to make room for something few other places wanted: a nuclear power plant.That act plunged the surrounding Yeongdeok County into a bitter debate over whether the plant would be a savior or a death knell. The clash also revealed the depth of despair in South Korea’s increasingly empty rural communities, as well as growing misgivings about the country’s heavy dependence on nuclear power.“We have no hope, no alternative other than a nuclear power plant,” said Lee Wan-seop, 54.Mr. Lee, a Yeongdeok native, believed that a power plant would bring “a great luck,” creating jobs and revenues, and arrest the county’s long decline.On the other side of the debate were villagers like Shin Wang-ki, 56, who grows pears, apples and peaches and believed that a power plant would mean the end to a longstanding and cherished way of life.“No way! Who’s going to buy fruits or crabs from an area near a nuclear power plant?” he said. “I inherited a clean land from my ancestors and want to leave it untainted for my children.”Yeongdeok, 155 miles southeast of Seoul, has some of the more beautiful vistas along the country’s east coast. Rolling waves burst into snow-white fields of foam at the foot of cliffs. For centuries, fishermen have carved their homes into the bluffs, like bird’s nests, plucking abalones and sailing out for bamboo crabs.Yet the county’s unusual pitch for a nuclear plant was driven by the same fight for survival seizing rural communities in South Korea and many other parts of the world. (Cheongsong, a county west of Yeongdeok, is campaigning for a new state prison.)Yeongdeok’s population, numbering 113,000 in 1974, has plunged to just 38,000 — nearly one-third of the people are 65 or older — and with deaths outnumbering births four to one, it is expected to shrink further. The county can supply only 8.8 percent of its budget on its own; the central government makes up the rest.So in 2005, when South Korea sought a storage site for low-level radioactive waste from its reactors but faced often violent protests from many communities, Yeongdeok volunteered.But Yeongdeok lost out to a rival bidder, Gyeongju to the south, after a greater percentage of residents, 89.5 percent, agreed to put the radioactive dump there.Five years later, when Yeongdeok learned of the government’s search for sites for new nuclear power plants, it did not want to lose out again. This time, it won the approval of all residents of the three villages offered as a site, as well as from all seven members of the County Council, before applying to the government.Kim Il-kwang, a fisherman, said he had few qualms about vacating Seokri, the village where his family has lived for nine generations, chiefly because it was dying a natural death anyway. Five hundred people lived there when he was young. Most of the 100 or so who remain are so old, Mr. Kim said, that he was considered “on the younger side.”Mr. Kim is 72.“If someone had to give up their village for Yeongdeok, we thought we might as well sacrifice ours,” he added. “Compensation we hoped to get for moving out would also be the best price we could ever expect for our land.”With no oil or gas reserves, South Korea must import almost all of its energy resources and finds nuclear power the cheapest way to keep its industries supplied with electricity. Its 24 nuclear reactors generate one-third of the country’s electricity. Four reactors are under construction, and another six are set to be built by 2027, including the two here.In 2012, South Korea selected Yeongdeok and Samcheok, a coastal city to the north, as sites for new reactors.Yet by then, skepticism — and anxiety — was spreading. First came the 2011 Fukushima disaster in Japan. Then came another shock: Reports that emerged after a series of scandals revealed that nuclear power plants across South Korea had been using parts whose safety test results were faked.Last year, a new mayor in Samcheok called a referendum in which residents voted against the decision made under the previous mayor. When the mayor of Yeongdeok refused to do likewise, residents opposed to the plant began organizing and outside activists poured in. They called a referendum on their own in November.The government and Korea Hydro & Nuclear Power Company, the country’s operator of nuclear power plants, urged residents not to take part in the referendum, which they called illegal because a state project was not subject to a county-level plebiscite. They also accused the outsiders of bringing antinuclear activism here to impede an important national project.Antinuclear villagers went on hunger strikes, accusing Korea Hydro & Nuclear Power executives of bribing older villagers with watermelons and other gifts.“People yelled at each other,” said Kwon Tae-hwan, who runs a local Internet news site. “They waged a war of banners, every single back alley strung with rival placards.”About 11,000 county residents participated in the referendum. Of them, nearly 92 percent voted against a nuclear power plant.Antinuclear activists claimed victory, while the government dismissed the result and reconfirmed its plan to build a plant here.The civil disobedience in Yeongdeok was only one of the many challenges South Korea’s nuclear power industry faced, problems it never had to confront when the first reactor went into operation in 1978 under an authoritarian government. In June, a government committee warned that beginning in 2019, old plants would run out of storage space for high-level radioactive wastes. The country urgently needed to build a new, central repository for such wastes, it said.But the government could not even start looking. Residents of Miryang, a village in the southeast, have recently staged prolonged protests, including a self-immolation, to oppose a far smaller potential hazard: high-voltage transmission towers to carry electricity from a distant nuclear plant.With the referendum over, Yeongdeok was back to its old, quiet self during a recent visit. Land prices have climbed, with new houses popping up on coastal hills. But the houses largely remain empty as speculators hope to get the power company to buy them under a law that calls for property owners near a nuclear plant to be compensated.Amid hilltop apple orchards, giant windmills spun, facing seaward. Trawlers rested behind breakwaters. A few hikers on the coastal trail ducked splotches of foam the ocean snorted up. Harvested rice paddies were strewn with what looked like giant marshmallows: bundles of straw rolled up in white plastic.Yet beneath the calm, tensions simmered.Residents on both sides of the nuclear question are waiting for parliamentary elections in April, when candidates from Yeongdeok will be asked to take sides.“Among people here, what the government said used to be the law and truth,” said Kim Eok-nam, 47, who believed his dream of marketing organic farm produce would evaporate with the arrival of a nuclear plant. “But over this nuclear power project, we will show we are no rural pushover.”