https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/24/us/9-in-deportation-protest-are-held-in-bid-to-re-enter-us.html
9 in Deportation Protest Are Held in Bid to Re-enter U.S. - The New York Times
National Immigrant Youth Alliance,Illegal Immigration,Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,Deportation,Nogales (Ariz),Mateo  Lizbeth,Martinez  Lulu,Saavedra  Marco,Amaro  Claudia,Gil Diaz  Adriana,Peniche  Maria,Santiago  Ceferino,Leon  Luis
July 23, 2013
3019
Nine young immigrants who had lived in the United States illegally were in custody Tuesday after a protest against deportations by the Obama administration in which they tried to enter the country without immigration papers through the border station at Nogales, Ariz.Organizers of the protest said five of the youths, who all grew up in the United States, had left the country previously. Two of them had been officially deported. Three youths crossed into Mexico voluntarily in recent days, even though they did not have legal visas to return, in what they described as a gesture of civil disobedience.The youths were initially detained on Monday by border authorities. On Tuesday, they asked for asylum and were transferred to the custody of immigration enforcement agents while their requests were reviewed. They were being held in an immigration detention center in Eloy, Ariz., officials said.The protest was a tactical escalation by some young immigrants, who call themselves Dreamers, to draw attention to what they said were inconsistencies by the administration, which has continued a fast pace of deportations even while President Obama is pressing Congress to pass legislation that would offer a path to citizenship to unauthorized immigrants.In a statement, officials from Customs and Border Protection said they could not discuss details of individual cases because of privacy concerns. But they noted that people seeking to enter the United States bear the burden “to establish that they are clearly eligible.”Immigration officials said it appeared unlikely the asylum petitions would succeed because the immigrants had lived until recently in the United States and not in Mexico where they might have faced danger. The officials said the young people appeared to have underestimated the difficulties they would face trying to be admitted without legal papers.Mohammed Abdollahi, a leader of the National Immigrant Youth Alliance, which organized the protest, said: “The idea we’re trying to make about immigration is that there’s no reason to detain them. They’re not high priority, they’re not a flight risk, in fact they’re actually fighting to stay in the country.”He said the immigrants would continue their protests inside the detention center and at their immigration court hearings. “It’s a waste of time, it’s a waste of money, just release them to their families so they can fight their cases from the outside,” he said.The names of those detained were given as Lizbeth Mateo, Lulú Martínez, Marco Saavedra, Claudia Amaro, Adriana Gil Diaz, Luis Leon, Maria Peniche and Ceferino Santiago. A ninth woman joined the group at the last minute, and her name and immigration status were unclear.