https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/09/books/review/newsbook-gay-rights-movement.html
3 Books on the Evolution of the Gay Rights Movement - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Same-Sex Marriage  Civil Unions and Domestic Partnerships,Becker  Jo
June 9, 2017
4075
As gay pride month kicks into gear, culminating in ebullient parades across the country, here are three books that take a look at the history of the gay rights movement.VICTORY (2012)The Triumphant Gay RevolutionBy Linda Hirshman443 pp.; HarperIn ”Victory," Linda Hirshman draws from archival records, firsthand interviews, and court documents to trace the history of gay rights from the early 20th century to the present. Her retelling is insightful, and as a lawyer, she offers clear legal and philosophical analysis of key court cases that influenced gay rights. Yet her delivery is hardly dry: Hirshman gives vivid accounts of rivalries between different gay advocacy groups, for instance. From the guerrilla activism of Act Up, the AIDS protest group, to the corporate buy-in for the same-sex marriage campaign, Hirshman deftly shows the reader how the gay movement has evolved and how, as she sees it, it has succeeded.QUEER AND LOATHING (1994)Rants and Raves of a Raging AIDS Clone By David B. Feinberg 275 pp.; VikingIn this collection of essays about living with AIDS, David B. Feinberg writes with honesty and humor. He takes his AZT medication “in the hopes of A Zillion T cells” (the cells killed by the H.I.V. virus), and attends a march organized by Act Up because he is a self-described “whore for publicity” and wants to publicize his new novel. Feinberg also conveys the anger, vulnerability, and indignity of dying while fighting to be heard by the federal government and society at large. He gives striking accounts of political demonstrations, as when a small group of activists dumped the ashes of loved ones lost to AIDS on the White House lawn — but also weaves in anecdotes from his own life and mock etiquette tips on how to treat the dying.FORCING THE SPRING (2014)Inside the Fight for Marriage EqualityBy Jo Becker470 pp.; The Penguin PressBefore the Supreme Court ruled definitively in 2015 that the constitution guaranteed the right to same-sex marriage, it heard two related landmark cases two years earlier: United States v. Windsor, in which Edith Windsor sued for access to the spousal estate tax exemption she was denied following her wife’s death, and Hollingsworth v. Perry, which challenged the constitutionality of California’s anti-gay-marriage Proposition 8. Jo Becker spent four years following the litigants of the Perry case — riding with them in cars, sitting with them in court, and listening in on their conference calls — and the result is an intimate look at some of the major players in the fight for same-sex marriage. Though the Perry case ended up being overshadowed by the Windsor case (Perry was sidestepped by the Supreme Court on a technicality) the groundwork laid by the players in that case transformed the way Americans think of gay rights.