https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/15/world/asia/south-korea-elections-park-geun-hye.html
After South Korea Spurns Park Geun-hye, She May Press Agenda Abroad - The New York Times
Park Geun-hye,Legislatures and Parliaments,Elections,South Korea,North Korea,Saenuri Party (South Korea),Minjoo Party (South Korea),International Relations,Economic Conditions and Trends
April 14, 2016
5091
SEOUL, South Korea — President Park Geun-hye of South Korea had hoped that this week’s legislative elections would give her party a stronger majority in Parliament, one that would let her finally push through changes to labor law and other domestic initiatives that have long been stalled.Instead, her party suffered a crushing and unexpected defeat in the voting on Wednesday, losing its majority altogether. And with the end of her term less than two years away, analysts here said on Thursday that they expected Ms. Park to look overseas in a bid for continued relevance — by making a bold move in foreign policy, much as President Obama has done in Cuba and Iran.The question, they said, is what that bold move would be — and what it could mean for her government’s tough stance on North Korea, which in recent months has flaunted its continued pursuit of nuclear weapons, conducting a fourth nuclear test and launching a long-range rocket.“She will likely drive hard to boost her visibility in foreign policy to prevent herself from becoming a lame duck,” said Kim Sung-han, a professor at Korea University in Seoul who served as a vice foreign minister under Ms. Park’s predecessor. “She may emulate how President Obama has tried to avoid becoming a lame duck in his final years by engineering breakthroughs with Iran and Cuba and on such global agendas as climate change.”Ms. Park’s conservative Saenuri Party did not merely lose its majority in Parliament in the elections on Wednesday, an outcome that few analysts had expected. It was reduced to becoming the No. 2 party in the 300-member body, winning a mere 122 seats — just short of the 123 won by the more progressive Minjoo Party. Minjoo favors reconciliation with North Korea, seeing Ms. Park’s policy as too rigid and too focused on punishing Pyongyang with sanctions.The elections took place amid widespread anxiety over economic concerns, such as sluggish growth and rising youth unemployment. In addition, many South Koreans have been dissatisfied with the governing style of Ms. Park, whose term expires in early 2018 and who is barred under the Constitution from seeking re-election. Many see her as a disconnected and even arrogant leader.Ms. Park’s foreign policy proved far less important to voters than domestic concerns. And policy-making authority here is concentrated in the presidency, limiting the legislature’s influence on relations with the North and other countries.Still, analysts agreed on Thursday that Ms. Park’s foreign policy, especially her approach to North Korea, would come under greater scrutiny in the new Parliament, the first in 16 years in which a party that does not hold the presidency has the most seats. A third, centrist party, the People’s Party, whose 38 seats will give it considerable sway, also supports a conciliatory approach to North Korea.“It has become difficult for the government to get cooperation from the opposition parties without amending its North Korean policy, which is lopsidedly about imposing sanctions,” said Cheong Seong-chang, a senior analyst at the Sejong Institute, a research institute south of Seoul.Ms. Park’s weakening domestic clout has also magnified the complex foreign policy challenges her country faces. Her government and Washington have been discussing deployment of the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense, a United States antimissile system. But many of the progressives now in control in Parliament oppose such a deployment because it would raise tensions with China.As of Thursday evening, the only response to the elections from Ms. Park’s office was a two-sentence statement urging Parliament to pass her economic legislation to improve the “livelihood of the people.”Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga of Japan expressed hope that the results in South Korea would not affect the landmark deal the two countries struck in December to help settle their historical dispute over Korean women who were forced to work in brothels that serviced Japanese soldiers during World War II. That agreement is unpopular among many South Koreans, including many of the surviving sex slaves themselves, but analysts said on Thursday that they doubted Ms. Park would renege on the accord.But North Korea policy could be another matter, they said. Mr. Kim, the Korea University professor, said he expected Ms. Park to put a new emphasis on dialogue, accelerating efforts to induce Pyongyang to come to the negotiating table, using the pressure built up through sanctions as leverage.But Kim Yong-hyun, a professor of North Korean studies at Dongguk University, said he thought it was also likely that Ms. Park would deploy adversarial language, highlighting the dangers posed by the North in a bid to consolidate support with her conservative base. “Her government may even exaggerate the threats, trying to use national security to maintain her influence and relevance,” Mr. Kim said.Ms. Park’s government was accused of doing just that in the prelude to the elections. After the government said last week that 13 North Koreans working at a restaurant overseas had defected as a group, many suspected that the announcement had been timed for the elections.(On Thursday, the South Korean Defense Ministry said it was monitoring North Korea more closely on the suspicion that it planned to conduct another nuclear test or the first-ever flight test of its Musudan ballistic missile, whose range is long enough to reach United States military bases in Guam.)Over the years, many South Koreans have grown disillusioned with attempts to engage North Korea, which has often repaid economic largess from the South with armed provocation. There is also widespread wariness of exaggerating North Korean threats and starting witch hunts for Communist sympathizers — a practice that past conservative leaders, including Ms. Park’s father, the military dictator Park Chung-hee, were accused of engaging in.The Saenuri Party’s prolonged campaign against progressive South Koreans — whom it often refers to as “jongbuk,” or untrustworthy sympathizers with North Korea — has raised eyebrows among many politically moderate South Koreans. That campaign “helped poison the voters’ mood against the government party,” said Mr. Kim, the Dongguk University professor.“People have been tired of President Park continuing to talk about North Korea while their main concern was the economy,” he said.Kim Dong-yup, an analyst at the Institute for Far Eastern Studies at Kyungnam University in Seoul, said Ms. Park was unlikely to make a drastic change in favor of reconciliation with the North, for fear of alienating conservative supporters.“I wonder how many of those who voted against her party voted against it because of its North Korea policy,” Mr. Kim said. “Rather, they voted against it because of things like her arrogance as leader.”“Besides, would liberal South Koreans suddenly support her if she changed her North Korea policy? I doubt it,” he said.Another factor that could limit Ms. Park’s maneuvering room, analysts said, is North Korea itself — which, quite apart from its open pursuit of nuclear-armed missiles, has repeatedly called her a prostitute in its belligerent official statements.Past attempts by South Korean presidents to reach out to the North toward the end of their terms have been poorly received. When the liberal President Roh Moo-hyun held a summit meeting in 2007 with North Korea’s leader at the time, Kim Jong-il, it was widely derided in the South as a desperate attempt to create a legacy. The subsequent conservative government nullified Mr. Roh’s summit meeting deal with Mr. Kim, which called for substantial South Korean investment in the North.“If President Park now suddenly accosts North Korea for a deal to improve ties, it will certainly demand outrageous economic and other incentives,” said Mr. Kim, the Kyungnam University analyst. “She could lose more than she gained.”