https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/13/travel/aspen-highlands-skiing.html
In Aspen, a Maverick Mountain to Test One’s Mettle - The New York Times
Travel and Vacations,Aspen (Colo),Skiing,Alpine Skiing,Colorado
Dec. 10, 2015
7956
3 Skiers, 3 Levels and 3 Mountains: Beginning at Sunapee, N.H., recapturing the thrill at Okemo, Vt., and mastering the unsung treasures of Aspen Highlands, Colo.If it’s possible to have a love affair with a mountain, Aspen Highlands is my snowy paramour.For sheer exhilaration, it’s hard to beat a run down Highland Bowl, its flagship expert terrain. But you have to work for it first. For many, that’s part of the appeal — it plays hard to get.The only way to get to the bowl’s almost two dozen above-treeline runs, which vary in pitch from 38 to 48 degrees, is to hoof it for as much as 782 vertical feet, carrying your skis or snowboard (preferably strapped to your back). Most days, a free snowcat shuttle can shave off some of the time required to make the ascent, but even if you take the ride, the hike along an exposed ridgeline all the way to the 12,392-foot summit can last a half-hour or more, depending on your acclimation to this oxygen-sparse environment.From the top, an incomparable view of the Maroon Bells, the iconic pair of 14,000-plus-foot nearby peaks, provides a ready excuse to catch your breath. The reward for all that work is an approximately 2,000-vertical-foot descent that runs as long as a top-to-bottom route at many ski areas. It ranks among the steepest terrain in Colorado. And if you’re lucky, it delivers the sort of deep powder and resulting face shots — even in late spring — for which you’d expect to pony up thousands of dollars to heli-ski operators. Put another way, skiing the bowl can make even the most serious of skiers whoop with joy like a giddy kid.Sure, Aspen Highlands isn’t the splashiest of the four local ski areas, all accessible with one lift ticket; that honor goes to Aspen Mountain, on the edge of Aspen’s tony downtown. Nor is it the biggest (Snowmass is). And unlike its X Games-hosting neighbor, Buttermilk, it has no terrain parks. What sets it firmly in the pantheon of expert resorts are the steep gladed trails that spill off both sides of the mountain’s long spine, caching powder several days after a storm; vertiginous mogul-studded runs like Soddbuster and Kessler’s that will thoroughly test your quads; and, of course, the aforementioned bowl. More than a third of the terrain is rated double-black diamond.My relationship with the area dates to 1997, when I visited to take part in an amateur mogul skiing competition on Scarlett’s Run, a wide swath of trail pockmarked with bumps in full view of the mid-mountain Merry-Go-Round restaurant. On a quest for personal challenge, I was thrilled just to make it down the course with some measure of competence. The next year, I moved to Aspen for a job and have been able to make regular ski dates with the mountain ever since. When I catch sight of it while driving nearby Highway 82, Highland Bowl standing like a proud sentinel at its southernmost end, my heart sometimes skips a beat.Highlands, as locals call it, was started in 1958 by the independent-minded Whip Jones, whose frequent sparring with the rival Aspen Skiing Company included a Supreme Court antitrust case that Jones won. The area came into the SkiCo fold in 1993, after Jones first donated it to his alma mater, Harvard. Since then, the mountain’s infrastructure has been radically transformed, with lifts that now make up one of the most efficient uphill transport systems in the United States, significant terrain additions and a small base village.Some of Jones’s maverick spirit remains. Though its under-the-radar status is changing, Aspen Highlands is still known as the locals’ mountain, and in the lift line — when there even is a line — you’re more apt to spot someone wearing a pair of ski pants patched with duct tape than a new Bogner jacket. (When the Merry-Go-Round was remodeled several winters ago, a usable spool of duct tape was installed near the entrance, a homage to the resourceful ski bum as well as a still-practical amenity.)Even the ski area’s high-end on-mountain restaurant, Cloud Nine Alpine Bistro, sits in a rustic, one-time ski patrol cabin. Years ago, patrollers would ski down from above, empty sleds in tow, and entertain onlookers by launching off the building’s low-slung roof. There’s no more roof jumping, but new for this winter, the bistro got an upgrade that polished up — just a bit — its eclectic interior.The iconoclasm extends to the trail system, too. More than at any mountain I’ve been to, the trail map identifies only a portion of the expert runs. After 17 winters of frequenting Highlands, including six as a part-time ski instructor, I still discover one or two lines a season I haven’t skied before. One day last March, as I zoomed past Boomerang Woods, a short, ungroomed pitch reached from the Loge Peak lift that I often ski for its backcountry feel, I noticed for the first time a small green wooden sign for Kali, another double black. I ducked into the tight stand of fir beyond and came upon a more open glade that tempted me right down its powdery fall line.Or there’s GLE (supposedly shorthand for Greatest Line Ever), my go-to for reliable powder stashes. Finding the run for the first time requires a bit of detective work. You can get to it from a traverse that cuts midway across the runs in the Steeplechase area. Once you navigate the abrupt entrance, this perfectly pitched run through trees enables the sort of turns that involve a nanosecond of delightful free fall in between. Wind up among the typically large moguls along the final stretch of Garmisch before skiing to the Deep Temerity lift.I could tell you about runs like Waterfall (hint: It’s off the green run Apple Strudel) or Shred It or Lucky Charm, but a good part of Highlands’ charm comes in making such discoveries for yourself.Some of my favorites don’t even have names. For example, there’s the narrowish clearing that remains from a former lift dismantled years ago (look for a short cat track that leads to it off skier’s left near the top of Gunbarrel). This never-groomed swath of snow includes zigzagging fall lines and a looming boulder at the bottom that can be easily skied around or used as a launching pad for getting some air. In the area known as Olympic Bowl, I love to tackle the first section of moguls on Deception, which can test your mettle with their size, then duck into the thick trees on the right, traverse over toward Aces and Eights, and ski the trees bordering the run’s left side.At many mountains, the expert terrain is concentrated in the higher reaches, but Highlands has plenty of challenging trails on its lower slopes too. Consider starting out with a few laps on the Thunderbowl lift, arcing big turns on Golden Horn, where local racers train, to warm up. Then hit up runs like Golden Horn Woods and Epicure, tucked into stands of aspen and fir and ranging from typical expert fare to more extreme terrain that may require hop turns, obstacle navigation and moments of steely resolve. Bonus: on a powder day, as most skiers beeline up the mountain, you can easily get first tracks in the Thunderbowl area.Perhaps the biggest takeaway from skiing Highlands is that, like any big-mountain terrain, it instills a sense of reverence. Last spring, three out-of-town girlfriends and I hiked to the top of the bowl and skied down G-6. We marveled at the remnants of a snow slide set off by a skier on the bowl’s other side. The area receives constant avalanche mitigation, starting in late fall when patrollers and volunteers hike up and down in ski boots to compact the snow, establishing a solid base for future snowfall to adhere to, and continuing throughout the winter with explosives and terrain closures when weather patterns warrant.But a week before, a skier had ducked a rope and entered a part of the bowl that was closed because of warming temperatures and resulting snow instability. He luckily retreated unscathed, but huge chunks of frozen avalanche debris, partly the result of ensuing control work done by patrollers, now rested at the bottom of the run. We paused to take photos.In addition to underscoring how important it is to respect terrain closures, it was an apt reminder of something else, too: No matter your level of skiing skill, the mountain has the upper hand.