https://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/26/sports/skiing/skiers-accept-injuries-and-often-transcend-them.html
Skiers Accept Injuries, and Often Transcend Them - The New York Times
Sports Injuries,World Cup (Skiing)
Jan. 25, 2014
7957
LAKE LOUISE, Alberta —  After completing her third race in three days in December — three tests, 10 months after reconstructive knee surgery and two months before the Sochi Olympics — Lindsey Vonn declared herself ready to go.Ready to win, actually.“I’ve obviously experienced a lot of injuries in my career, but this is definitely at the top of the list,” Vonn said then, raising her hand up near eye level. “Skiing with not very much A.C.L. left — it’s pretty hard-core.”Four weeks later, though, having reinjured her right knee, Vonn, a two-time Olympic medalist, called off her bid to be ready for the Sochi Games, reminding everyone what so many ski racers know so well: Theirs is an unforgiving sport. A review of the careers of the top 50 in the overall World Cup standings on Jan. 12 — the 25 men and 25 women most likely to earn an Alpine medal in Russia, where the first race is scheduled for Feb. 9 — shows that more than half have missed significant time because of a skiing-related injury.“She understands that, at some point in time, you’re going to have a serious injury,” said Vonn’s father, Alan Kildow. “It just happened to be before an Olympic year.”Of the 27 athletes found to have experienced major health issues after ski accidents, 18 had damaged knees, usually a torn ligament, as happened to Vonn.There is a sense of inevitability among elite ski racers and coaches, as if it is a cost of doing business. If a big injury has not happened yet, the thinking goes, it will.Each time there is an injury in a race or training, there are two parts of the comeback: the physical and the mental.“We see a lot of shooting stars come in young, and I’m always the one to say, Let’s wait until after the injury,” said Hugues Ansermoz, the coach of Canada’s women’s Alpine team. “I know it sounds bad, but that’s the way it is. There have been a few people that disappear after injury; they can never come back. And this is not good, but it’s part of the game. The champions, the real champions, they all come back stronger.”Ansermoz, previously Switzerland’s coach, pointed to someone from that country, Lara Gut. She won two silver medals as a teenager at the 2009 world championships and was expected to shine at the Vancouver Games — until she dislocated her right hip in a training crash in September 2009 and sat out the Olympics.Now Gut is back, winning four World Cup races from late October to early December.“After my injury, I started building my body again and my skills again,” said Gut, 22.The International Ski Federation, or F.I.S., makes rules changes here and there in the name of increased safety, such as tweaking specifications for the skis. Helmets that are supposed to better shield heads in falls were introduced this season. More and more protective netting abuts courses.“There’s always room for improvement, for sure, but it’s also necessary to say we’re at a very, very high level now in terms of what’s possible,” said Atle Skaardal, the women’s race director for F.I.S. “Everything is improving the whole time.” He added, however, that in a sport contested at high speed, “you can’t eliminate everything.”In other words, If you throw your body down the slippery side of a mountain at a velocity barred for vehicles on most roads in the United States, you are bound to fall at some point. And if you fall, you are bound to twist a leg or land on an arm or do damage in some way.A concussion, say. Or a bruised back. Or a scraped-up face. Or — more often than not, it seems — a torn-up knee.“There are a lot of athletes who have gone through A.C.L. reconstruction,” said the American Ted Ligety, a gold medalist at the 2006 Turin Games in Italy and a three-time winner at last year’s world championships. “A lot of guys who have broken pelvises and legs. That’s part of the sport. I’d say 90 percent of ski racers come back from A.C.L. injuries just as good, if not stronger than before.”Ligety, 29, from Park City, Utah, is one of the lucky ones: He has not been forced to miss an Olympics or world championships because of a major injury. But that is not to say he never has been hurt. One example: Ligety wiped out during downhill training at United States nationals in 2009, crashing face-first and partly tearing ligaments in his right knee.But he did not need surgery. He did miss out on weeks of training while his knee was immobilized.His American teammate Bode Miller, a five-time Olympic medalist, was away from competition for 20 months, including last year’s world championships, as he worked his way back from microfracture surgery on his left knee, which was originally injured in 2001. Joining Vonn on the sideline for Sochi are two reigning world champions from France: Tessa Worley and Marion Rolland. Both injured knees.During the women’s downhill race at Vancouver four years ago, Rolland was among a half-dozen racers who crashed, tearing a ligament seconds into her run. Edith Miklos, a Romanian, was airlifted by helicopter with a knee injury. The five-time Olympic medalist Anja Paerson of Sweden lost control on the last jump, landed on her back and slid across the finish line.Another racer falling that day was Dominique Gisin of Switzerland, who has needed nine operations on her knees through the years, seven on the right one.“I’ve had A.C.L.’s,” said Gisin, about the anterior cruciate ligament. “I had a broken patella several times. I had ripped-out muscles. I think I did everything you can do to a knee, probably.“I love the sport, and I always try to fight back. But it’s not so easy, especially in the head. The mental part is probably harder.”