https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/30/sports/basketball/new-system-and-season-bring-carmelo-anthony-and-knicks-fresh-perspective.html
New System and Season Bring Carmelo Anthony and Knicks Fresh Perspective - The New York Times
Basketball,Anthony  Carmelo,New York Knicks
Sept. 29, 2014
9258
GREENBURGH, N.Y. —  If any doubt lingered over whether Carmelo Anthony had finally emerged from the dungeon of despair that was the 2013-14 season, he seemed determined to squash it on Monday when he took the dais at the Knicks’ training center.He used words like “excited” (six times), “fun” (four times) and “rejuvenated” (once). He talked about embracing the opportunity to start fresh in a new system. He cited recent conversations about the triangle offense with N.B.A. luminaries including Kobe Bryant, Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen. He spoke of his improved conditioning, his belief in his teammates and the long journey before them.With the Knicks set to begin training camp Tuesday at West Point, Anthony sounded as if he had just returned from an ashram.“I have a lot of clarity,” he said. “A lot of understanding.”If it felt like optimism run amok — and it should be noted that almost nobody on the planet expects the Knicks to vie for a championship — then it was at least understandable. The new Knicks are not the old Knicks, or at least they do not plan to be.On the eve of training camp everyone is expected to feel pretty good about themselves. Even Iman Shumpert, who came unglued at times last season after being the subject of constant trade talks, pledged to show up for work every day with a smile. Maybe things truly are changing.Then again, as Anthony pointed out, every team in the league is “0-0,” free of wins but also unblemished by the losses that plagued the Knicks last season in a 37-45 campaign that left them short of the playoffs despite a diluted Eastern Conference.“We don’t want to feel that pain again,” Anthony said. “I saw this off-season the amount of time my teammates put in the gym to work on what they need to work on. They got with the coaches. They were all together. And I think everybody is just ready to take that next step and make that change.”Part of that, Anthony said, has to do with the arrival of Phil Jackson, the team president, and Derek Fisher, the first-year coach. Anthony referred to the positive energy that comes with a culture change, a phrase that has fast become very popular with the team.Amid the upheaval, much of the personnel is the same. But the players’ perspectives have changed. Amar’e Stoudemire, for example, has set the dizzying goal of becoming an All-Star again. J. R. Smith wants to become more of a leader. And, of course, there is Anthony, who has vowed to be the ultimate team player.For now, it’s all lip service, and even Jackson has pumped the brakes. He talked again last Friday about how top-tier scorers need to resist the urge to shoot every time they touch the ball. It will be a process for Anthony, Jackson said, just as it will be for the entire team.Anthony, who led the league in minutes played last season, said he took a first step over the summer by targeting his physical fitness. He changed his diet and stripped some body fat. It was nothing dramatic, he said, but it made a difference.“I haven’t felt like this from a physical standpoint in a long time, “he said. “More than anything, it’s a mental aspect — I’m at a good place right now.”Anthony said he had been working out at the training center for the past three weeks, seeking insight on the new system from Fisher and the rest of the coaching staff. A huge chunk of that new system is the triangle offense — or at least the derivative that Fisher plans to run. Like the rest of the organization, Anthony tried to tamp down expectations.“I know it’s not going to happen overnight,” Anthony said, adding that he does expect the Knicks to make the playoffs. “I believe we’ll be there at the end.”Last season, Anthony’s uncertain future with the team ballooned into a full-blown saga, especially as the losses mounted. Anthony, though, said he was never distracted by all the talk over his impending free agency and never let it affect his play on the court. He ultimately signed a new five-year deal with the Knicks in July (for $125 million), even though he could have joined an instant contender like the Chicago Bulls (for less money).“For me to just get up and leave like that — now that I look back at it — it wouldn’t have felt right,” Anthony said. “From a basketball standpoint, it probably would have been maybe the greatest thing to do. But for me personally, I wouldn’t have felt right with myself, knowing that I wanted to come here, that I forced my way to New York. I have some unfinished business to take care of.”It is unclear how long it will take the team to attend to that business, and Anthony indicated he was ready to be patient.“Now, how long I’m willing to be patient, I can’t really tell you that,” he said. “But I’m willing to be patient.”