https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/30/arts/television/stephen-colbert-trump-tweets-mika.html
Stephen Colbert Is Shocked That He Finds Trump’s Tweets Shocking - The New York Times
Brzezinski  Mika,Colbert  Stephen,Trump  Donald J,Meyers  Seth,Fallon  Jimmy,Late Show with Stephen Colbert (TV Program),The Tonight Show (TV Program),Late Night with Seth Meyers (TV Program),Call of Duty (Video Game)
June 30, 2017
2247
Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com.Stephen Colbert declared himself shocked by President Trump’s vitriolic tweets on Thursday about Mika Brzezinski, a co-host of MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.” That’s a feeling he thought he wasn’t able to experience anymore, he told the “Late Show” audience. “I thought that my soul had calcified into a crouton,” he said.He picked apart the tweets, which accused Ms. Brzezinski of “bleeding badly” from plastic surgery.He quoted a Deadline.com article about the tweets suggesting that they marked a “new low” for the president. Mr. Colbert didn’t agree.Near the start of “Late Night,” Seth Meyers reacted to Mr. Trump’s tweets with his own brand of bafflement. Introducing a new segment called “I Can’t,” Mr. Meyers spent a solid 10 seconds in silence. Then he just said: “I can’t.”Mr. Meyers did a longer segment on the Republican health care bill in the Senate, quoting a poll showing 12 percent support for the legislation.Mr. Meyers quoted a number of reports saying that many of Mr. Trump’s colleagues don’t believe he understands the bill.He closed the monologue by also placing blame on Speaker Paul D. Ryan and Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader.Doesn’t get much more intellectual than this right here.Clip-on pants?Have a great Independence Day weekend. The late-night hosts will all take off next week.“Gypsy” is expertly acted and directed, with delicately placed motifs and a slow-burning plotline. But ultimately it turns out to be proof that bad TV can still be made very well. This, the critic James Poniewozik writes, is bad TV.