http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/08/books/review/howard-slatkins-fifth-avenue-style-and-more.html
Howard Slatkin’s ‘Fifth Avenue Style,’ and More - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Interior Design and Furnishings
Dec. 6, 2013
3636
It must be the whisper of time as it bends over the horizon, a susurration of mortality none can escape. What else could have prompted so many decorators to publish their portfolios, visual memoirs that attest to lives rich with clients? Decorating is one of the most evanescent of the visual arts. It’s painful to walk into a room in which every inch has been lavished with attention, imagination and money, only to learn that the wrecking ball is about to arrive, commissioned by the next decorator. Devastating — when it isn’t good riddance to bad rubbish. Sometimes it takes a while to tell the difference.Memories of décor past run poignantly through this season’s weighty tomes. In NICKY HASLAM’S FOLLY DE GRANDEUR: Romance and Revival in an English Country House (Rizzoli, $50), the English decorator recalls his father’s bedroom. The walls were “exquisitely painted paneling. . . . Considered among the finest in England, they were stripped back to bare pine by subsequent owners.” And in MARIO BUATTA: Fifty Years of American Interior Decoration (Rizzoli, $75), the New York-born decorator recalls the ballroom of the Fiat heiress Suni Agnelli, covered in a “pulse-racing russet floral” with “bleacherlike tiered sofas at one end.” I can only imagine the pulses that stopped when word got out that the Prince of Chintz had been hired to paper over the Queen of Chic.No one ever lingers long in someone else’s fantasy of home. The person smitten with a house is no different from any other lover; the dance has the same steps: I love you, you’re perfect, now change. Redecorating is the name of the game, for which the design world is truly grateful.Buatta’s reign reached its apogee, trailing miles of printed cotton, in the 1980s. He was America’s best-known decorator for years. His monograph is bursting with exuberance: walls of poison green (they “add energy”), pineapple yellow, deep claret, plum, luscious cherry red and eggplant. If it sounds like health food, it is. My eyes got a much-needed workout after wading through pages and pages of beige in some other decorators’ books. “I believe in saturation,” Buatta says. And how. His look resonated with times of big, new money, when titans of finance wanted what Buatta calls the “Instant Heritage look.” He gave it to them: an American spin on English decorating.How can any decorator’s rooms avoid looking self-conscious? The answer, I think, lies in the life that spools on when the paper hangers have gone home. For a glimpse of a real, and gorgeous, English country house, dip into Haslam’s splendid book. There you will climb narrow staircases papered with large roses and gaze at walls painted the color of scumbled stone. Images of dragonflies and frogs scamper across guest room walls. Haslam is the sort of useful man who knows to spray a fabric with tea “to deaden the white background.” (The dipping, beating, dragging and all other manner of distressing innocent objects has become a leitmotif in decorating books.) Nothing is ever best left alone. Haslam’s rooms look as though they’re loved. Things are allowed to age and shred and crumble, and therein lies their charm.We have Belgium to thank for a great deal of beige. You may think the way a man has done up his ancient castle overseas is utterly irrelevant to our way of life here in the United States, but clearly you haven’t recently set foot in that treasure trove of home furnishings, Restoration Hardware. It looks as if Axel Vervoordt, a large-scale legend, was consulted. His previous book, “Timeless Interiors,” has become a cult classic. His new one, AXEL VERVOORDT: Living With Light (Flammarion, $75),  with text by Michael Gardner, will surely give devotees another case of the vapors. Vervoordt is drawn to antiques with great character, and he gives them ample, nearly worshipful room to shine. But we could do with a bit less pretension about projects that “represent an encounter between intellectual enlightenment, spiritual enlightenment and the physical and pure energy of natural light.” Let’s just admit it: Eighteenth-century rooms, antique Korean vases, slabs of Guatemalan green marble and 15th-century oak chests have their own aura.Decorating books offer a chance to peek into rooms most of us would never otherwise see. It’s plain old voyeurism, and it can be seductive and inspiring — or depressing. A restless quest for perfection and prestige wafts through many of these volumes, but it’s hard to hang one’s identity, whether as client or decorator, on ephemera. The ’80s, it turns out, had nothing on the aughts when it comes to lavish decorating. The only difference is that the new titans of industry want more choices in their Instant Heritage.Howard Slatkin, the Zeffirelli of interior design, has produced an operatic ode to his own apartment. FIFTH AVENUE STYLE: A Designer’s New York Apartment (Vendome, $60) is the most lavish book on the most lavishly detailed home I’ve ever seen. Not a bit of frippery, swag, frill or stone goes unturned. Italian palazzo meets Russian princess, all of it conjured out of a previously undistinguished Manhattan apartment — albeit one with nice views.The Oklahoma-born decorator Stephen Sills masters a more muscular elegance. In STEPHEN SILLS: Decoration (Rizzoli, $65), we find him raking plaster to create a corduroyed wall, installing floor tiles on a ceiling and cobblestones on a guesthouse floor, framing the entrance to a library with marble columns from the Mamluk period — to powerful, startling and unforgettable effect. Does all this cost an Etruscan arm and a leg? Yes. But when you want to learn about the decorative arts, take your cue from the masters, not the flea market. Or, worse yet, television.Several monographs try hard to be relevant to some of the 99.99 percent. In ALEXA HAMPTON: Decorating in Detail (Potter Style, $50), the author offers entries like “Endless Variations on Blue and White,” the classic color combination, and wrestles to explain “Defining Details” like tassels and nailheads. Suzanne Kasler, who designed the interiors of Blackberry Farm, that marvelous Tennessee country inn, isn’t offended when people call her work “pretty.” It’s that, and more. Should you become enthralled with a fabric or a chair in SUZANNE KASLER: Timeless Style (Rizzoli, $55), she often takes the trouble to tell you who actually makes it.For those who want to see how another creative tribe lives, there’s BEYOND CHIC: Great Fashion Designers at Home (Vendome, $85), by Ivan Terestchenko. Here are more people who have a knack for finding old castles; or a stunning old factory, as did Azzedine Alaïa; or an elegant Victorian house in Bath, as did Manolo Blahnik; or what Nicole Farhi calls home, a former military hospital built in 1700. Terestchenko’s book has thousands of details to linger over and, thankfully, not much text. The pictures say enough.In order to live creatively, you have to be creative — in which case, you don’t need a design book. But there’s something bracing about seeing the self-assurance with which some people express themselves. They need no permission. Their rooms shout with self-confidence (and occasionally not much else). Maybe that means we too can take the plunge and, if the spirit moves us, hang all our shoes on the wall. And that brings us to our own little Made in America enclave of creativity, Brooklyn. Anne Hellman’s DESIGN BROOKLYN: Renovation, Restoration, Innovation, Industry (Stewart, Tabori and Chang, $40) is quirky, spirited, surprising and useful — brimming with charm and delight. If I can’t move into the Bellocq Tea Atelier, then at least I can be inspired by its sunflower yellow canisters, wet against aubergine walls, next time I redecorate.