https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/15/fashion/france-brigitte-macron-louis-vuitton.html
Brigitte Macron Inaugurates a New Look for France - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Louis Vuitton,France,Macron  Brigitte
May 15, 2017
3387
On Sunday, when Brigitte Macron strode up the red carpet at the Élysée Palace alongside her husband, Emmanuel Macron, for his inauguration as president of France, it marked not only the official transition of power but also the advent of a new kind of first lady for the nation, and a new kind of political partnership. And it suggested that the Michelle Obama-size hole that has been left in the art of sartorial communications and diplomacy since America’s former first couple left the world stage may be about to be filled — though in an original way.In her knee-baring, powder-blue Louis Vuitton dress, with its matching military-inspired jacket, Ms. Macron managed to make a statement about her independence and refusal to fit into any established box (from political parties to age-appropriate dressing) without overtly rejecting the past, and while underscoring her husband’s messaging in a multitude of ways. All without saying a word, though the images went global.It was quite a strategic opening.While there was some online chatter about the color of the ensemble recalling Melania Trump’s Ralph Lauren dress-and-jacket at her husband’s inauguration, it seems to me that in detail and effect, the two could not be further apart. Mrs. Trump’s choice, after all, called to mind nothing so much as the past: Jacqueline Kennedy and Camelot. Ms. Macron’s look spoke to the future, and to how she is redefining her role.She has been doing it in myriad ways since her husband declared his candidacy for president, but while attention has largely been focused on their unconventional love story (she is 64, 24 years older than him), her unconventional wardrobe — at least for a political spouse of a certain age — has played a less observed part.Skinny jeans, leather leggings, jackets (tailored and motorcycle-inspired), short skirts, New Balance sneakers and Louis Vuitton handbags, even the occasional hoodie, have formed the building blocks of her style: one that reaches across generations, and just says “no” to the classic knee-length skirt suits of the bourgeoisie — and to any historical diktats about what women older than 60 are supposed to wear. It may be the least of the breaks from tradition in which she and her husband are engaged, but in some ways it is the most accessible, which makes it powerful.Especially because she is being cheered as an icon of “French style” as a result. Though equally interesting is the icon of French style she has enlisted in her cause. Traditionally, first ladies and female leaders from Mrs. Kennedy to Queen Elizabeth II and Angela Merkel have worked with a single designer on creating their image, a pattern broken in recent years by Mrs. Obama, and her peers Samantha Cameron and Sophie Grégoire Trudeau. While Ms. Macron seems to be engaged in a return to form, her choice of collaborator is an interesting one.Vuitton is a brand with which Ms. Macron has been allied since Bastille Day 2015 (coincidence? I doubt it), when she first wore one of its navy dresses at a public event. It is a tent-pole name in French luxury — founded in 1854; owned by the richest man in France, Bernard Arnault; part of the country’s most successful export sector — yet one that is still mostly known for its handbags (despite having had a ready-to-wear line since 1998) and that has rarely been adopted by the political elite. Carla Bruni-Sarkozy, the wife of former President Nicolas Sarkozy, tended to wear Christian Dior in her official appearances, often opting for the most toned-down, well-behaved pieces in the collection; Valérie Trierweiler, partner of François Hollande at the start of his presidency, was known for her Saint Laurent Tribute stilettos. Bernadette Chirac, the wife of former President Jacques Chirac, was partial to Chanel.Ms. Macron, by contrast, has attended Vuitton shows and tends to choose the brand for public occasions, when she knows she is going to be in the eyes of the world beyond the French constituency, most recently on election night. That’s not an accident. And she has managed to defray the possible political cost of being so close to an elitist name, unaffordable to many, by — as the brand has made clear — arranging to borrow most of what she wears, including her Inauguration Day look, and then returning it (she does buy some of it). She casts herself thus as an ambassador of and conduit for French creativity, as opposed to simply an acquirer of it.By doubling down on that relationship and seeming to formally inaugurate Vuitton as her go-to brand, Ms. Macron made a tactical choice to elevate a different name in the game of image-ineering. One that, as the brand’s last collection made clear, happens to share her husband’s belief in the value of cross-border relationships and cross-fertilization. Simply consider the artistic director Nicolas Ghesquière’s statement after the fall 2017 show — that he wanted to use fashion to demonstrate the value of breaking “every boundary possible.”Coincidence? Again, I doubt it.Just as I doubt that the epaulets on Ms. Macron’s inauguration jacket, and its shiny double-breasted rows of buttons, were a coincidence on an occasion that Mr. Macron filled with military symbolism. Her outfit gave visual support to his message, which included driving up the Champs-Élysées in a military vehicle.It also hinted at an awareness of the inevitable battles ahead. En garde.