https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/24/us/ann-coulter-university-of-california-berkeley.html
Conservative Groups Sue Berkeley Over Ann Coulter Cancellation - The New York Times
Speeches and Statements,Suits and Litigation (Civil),University of California  Berkeley,Coulter  Ann,Berkeley (Calif)
April 24, 2017
6646
BERKELEY, Calif. — Days after the University of California, Berkeley, canceled an appearance by the author Ann Coulter, two conservative organizations filed a federal lawsuit on Monday accusing the university of trying to “to restrict conservative speech” on campus.The legal action came after the university canceled Ms. Coulter’s appearance, scheduled for this week, on the grounds that specific threats by anarchist groups threatened security on campus. The groups that invited Ms. Coulter say she is planning to come anyway.The lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in San Francisco, was brought by the Berkeley College Republicans and the Young America’s Foundation, a national organization that promotes conservative causes.“Berkeley promises its students an environment that promotes free debate and the free exchange of ideas,” the lawsuit said, but the promise was breached “through the repressive actions of university administrators and campus police.”Berkeley has become a meeting ground of activist and militant groups from the left and right in recent months, leading to violent clashes that left some people injured.The lawsuit demands that the Berkeley College Republicans be allowed to “bring speakers of its choosing to speak on campus.” It also says the College Republicans and the Young America’s Foundation are entitled to unspecified “monetary damages arising from the unconstitutional actions” of university administrators, as well as legal costs.A university spokesman said the issue was a matter of security.“Ann Coulter is welcome on this campus but at a time when we can provide a venue that law enforcement professionals believe to be protectable,” a spokesman for the university, Dan Mogulof, said.Last week the university proposed an alternative date and time — May 2, in the afternoon — an offer that the College Republicans rejected because it came during a study week before the end of the term.Mr. Mogulof said the university had received “letters and threats” from around the country.“As individuals or part of a militia, they intend to come to the campus to support Ann Coulter,” he said. “Our concerns have only grown.”In addition to accusing the university of “unilaterally” canceling Ms. Coulter’s speech, the lawsuit says the Berkeley College Republicans were forced to cancel a speaking engagement earlier this month by David Horowitz, another conservative writer, after the university demanded that the speech take place in the afternoon and a mile away from the center of the campus.The lawsuit accuses the university of unreasonably restricting the time and place of events involving high-profile speakers which resulted in the “marginalization of the expression of conservative viewpoints.”Dianne Klein, a spokeswoman for Janet Napolitano, the president of the University of California system, said the contention that the university prohibited conservative speakers was “untrue.”Ms. Klein said one of the plaintiffs, the Young America’s Foundation, had sponsored many other speaking events at Berkeley in past years.“The University of California welcomes speakers of all political viewpoints and is committed to providing a forum to enable Ann Coulter to speak on the Berkeley campus,” Ms. Klein said in a statement.Rory Little, a professor at the University of California Hastings College of Law, said the lawsuit appeared “premature.”“The allegation is that Berkeley has a secret policy that discriminates against conservatives,” Professor Little said. “Berkeley will argue it is changing its policies because they are facing new conditions. We haven’t seen this level of violence in a long time.”The complaint, he said, was based on a small handful of conservative speakers, perhaps not enough to show a pattern. “They are going to get a lot of publicity,” Professor Little said of the groups that brought the lawsuit. “This is more of a political move than it is a legal move.”The most serious violence on the Berkeley campus this year occurred in February when an anarchist group successfully blocked Milo Yiannopoulos, a right-wing journalist, from giving a speech. The demonstrators smashed windows, set fires and stormed the building where the speech was to take place. The university calculated the damages at around $100,000.