https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/05/world/europe/eu-presses-for-accord-with-turkey-to-ease-flow-of-migrants.html
E.U. Presses for Accord With Turkey to Ease Flow of Migrants - The New York Times
Turkey,Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Europe,Syria,European Union,Humanitarian Aid,Asylum  Right of,Davutoglu  Ahmet,Greece,Merkel  Angela,Tusk  Donald
March 4, 2016
5554
BRUSSELS —  Leaders of the European Union are aiming to push Turkey closer to an agreement on Monday intended to make the flow of migrants to the Continent more orderly and relieve the fast-growing humanitarian crisis in Greece.Under the emerging agreement, the European Union could add to the 3 billion euros, about $3.3 billion, it pledged to give to aid organizations in Turkey in November to help it manage the 2.7 million Syrian refugees there, and it would directly resettle a large number of Syrian refugees living in camps in Turkey.But first, Turkey would have to reduce the numbers of people leaving its shores and agree to take back large numbers of migrants who have poured across the Aegean Sea in search of economic opportunities, but who are not legally eligible for political asylum in Europe.Even though leaders were not expected to reach a final deal on Monday — or even reach agreement on the numbers of people who should be transferred between Europe and Turkey — top European officials raised hopes on Friday that there would be some progress.“For the first time since the beginning of the migration crisis, I can see a European consensus emerging,” Donald Tusk, the president of the European Council, which comprises the leaders of the 28 member countries, wrote to the leaders on Friday, after a week of meetings in the Balkans and in Turkey.Progress on such a deal would benefit Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, which, along with Sweden, has taken in most of the migrants. Ms. Merkel’s popularity at home has plunged, and her ruling Christian Democratic Union faces serious challenges in state elections this month.Ms. Merkel’s attempts to stop migrants from leaving Turkey in the first place have thus far failed, but whether the renewed push Mr. Tusk is developing, with her tacit support, would be any more effective remains deeply uncertain.Turkey is grappling with a host of other problems stemming from the civil war in Syria — including an emboldened Kurdish population within its borders, and terrorist attacks by the Islamic State — and may not be able, or willing, to do what the European Union is asking of it.“Part of what is on the table is wholesale return of people to Turkey, but on what basis would that happen?” asked Elizabeth Collett, director of the Migration Policy Institute Europe, a research group in Brussels.While Syrians are seen as having the strongest claim for asylum, the legal status of many Afghans and Iraqis is less clear. The prospect of deporting large numbers of them to Turkey seems difficult at best.“The overall structure of the bargain is clear but what is so hellishly complicated are the details and implementation, and that could be a nightmare,” said Jan Techau, the director of Carnegie Europe, a research organization. “You can strike a political balance at the highest levels, but then how do you decide where to settle people in Europe and how to manage the asylum procedures?”It is also possible that the smugglers might simply avoid Turkey and come up with other routes.Finally, the emerging plan would not answer a quandary that has dogged the bloc: the unwillingness of most countries to welcome significant numbers of newcomers, even those with a clear legal claim to asylum.“Hungary won’t accept any migrants from Turkey,” the Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orban, said flatly on Friday, after meeting Horst Seehofer, the governor of the southern German state of Bavaria, who has been sharply critical of Ms. Merkel, an erstwhile political ally. “Other countries can accept them. We don’t. We need to be able to close our borders hermetically, and differentiate economic migrants from refugees.”Mr. Orban did not directly criticize Ms. Merkel, however. “We otherwise fully support the German plan with Turkey,” he said, adding: “It will cost money Hungary is ready to contribute. But it doesn’t replace the protection of our own borders with our own capacities.”Meeting with Ms. Merkel in Paris, the French president, François Hollande, said that “France and Germany are working in the same spirit and with the same desire” to resolve the migrant crisis. Mr. Hollande said France would “fulfill its commitment” to take in “30,000 Syrian or Iraqi refugees” — but his stance is quite different from that of Ms. Merkel, who has steadfastly refused to cap the number of asylum seekers Germany will take in.At a news conference in Brussels, Dimitris Avramopoulos, the European commissioner for migration, said European leaders hoped to make progress with Turkey on Monday so it agrees to the return of people deemed ineligible for asylum in Europe, including non-Syrians.Turkey’s prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, has said privately that Turkey is prepared to do just that, according to two people with knowledge of those talks, who spoke Friday on condition of anonymity because the outlines of the agreement have not been made public.The plans would involve Greece’s setting up an office to coordinate the return of migrants to Turkey and the placement of one Turkish liaison officer in Greece to help that process, one of the people with knowledge of the discussions said.Earlier this week, Greece returned more than 300 migrants of various nationalities to Turkey, as a step toward more orderly policies in the region.In his letter, Mr. Tusk also urged leaders, who are gathering in Brussels on Monday, to agree on restoring orderly asylum procedures so that migrants are registered and assessed upon arrival, before they journey onward. “With that we will close the Western Balkans route, which was the main entry point for migrants,” he wrote.More than 1.2 million people sought asylum in the European Union last year, double the number from 2014, according to the European statistics agency. Syrians, Afghans and Iraqis accounted for more than half the applications.