https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/05/books/review/comics-the-art-of-charlie-chan-hock-chye-and-more.html
Comics: ‘The Art of Charlie Chan Hock Chye,’ and More - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Graphic Novels,The Art of Charlie Chan Hock Chye (Book),Liew  Sonny,Mary Wept Over the Feet of Jesus (Book),Brown  Chester (1960- ),Everything Is Teeth (Book),Wyld  Evie,Peplum (Book),Hincker  Christian (Blutch) (1967- ),Something New: Tales from a Makeshift Bride (Book),Knisley  Lucy (1985- ),Agony (Book),Beyer  Mark (1950- )
June 1, 2016
3476
Graphic novels make summer reading stranger and more fun. Open one up, and your beach landscape (or fire escape) is replaced by an imaginary view: an artist’s impressions of an Australian shark museum or a grime-­spattered Roman Empire, or a jungle whose talking animals stand in for Singaporean politicians of the 1950s.THE ART OF CHARLIE CHAN HOCK CHYE (Pantheon, $30) presents itself as a coffee-table victory lap. It purports to be a graphic biography of “Singapore’s greatest comics artist,” punctuated by examples of his work from 1944 (a childhood drawing of Donald Duck) to 2012 (an oil painting of Singapore’s prime minister Lee Kuan Yew). In fact, it’s something entirely different: a hugely ambitious, stylistically acrobatic work by the Singapore-based cartoonist Sonny Liew.Charlie Chan Hock Chye is Liew’s invention, and his fictional life story is the vehicle for both a political history of Singapore’s past seven decades and Liew’s visual homages to comics’ most commercially successful innovations. Early on, when we see teenage Chan Hock Chye caught up in Singapore’s 1954 National Service protests, the narrative is abruptly supplanted by an excerpt from a story he published around that time, “Ah Huat’s Giant Robot” — supposedly a fantasy inspired by the young artist’s experiences, but also a parody of Osamu Tezuka’s early comics (complete with yellowed newsprint textures and typeset English lettering).The parts of the book that satirize Singaporean politics often call for a bit of explanation, which Liew provides by way of endnotes and, occasionally, tiny figures chatting in the pages’ margins. There’s a lot of commentary on the rivalry between Lee Kuan Yew and Lim Chin Siong over the country’s direction, for instance, and a Chan Hock Chye story involving a stationery store selling “O.B. markers” is a joke about the “out-of-bounds markers,” or the “invisible, shifting boundaries,” that limited political discourse in the early ’90s. (It’s worth noting that Singapore’s National Arts Council originally gave Liew a grant to work on this book, and then withdrew it, citing “sensitive content.”)Visually, though, the book is a mercurial delight, constantly switching between Liew’s invented narrative (in a relatively neutral nonfiction style), images of Chan Hock Chye’s works in progress over the course of his career and mock-weathered clippings from his printed creations, most of which are immaculate pastiches of famous cartoonists. A page from a 1957 story about a World War II massacre of Chinese civilians filters the look of Harvey Kurtzman’s “Two-Fisted Tales” through Art Spiegelman’s “Maus”; an early-’60s satirical newspaper strip, “Bukit Chapalang,” takes its artistic and linguistic cues from Walt Kelly’s “Pogo”; a 1988 political thriller, “Days of August,” is a riff on Frank Miller’s “The Dark Knight Returns.”The final sections of the book are somewhat scattered; Liew seems to be driving at some point about modernity in both Singapore and comics, and doesn’t quite get there, although the witty visual allusions keep flying by. The story keeps hinting at a moment of glory that never arrives, as Chan Hock Chye works his way up from humble beginnings to nearly as humble present-day circumstances — which could be Liew’s assessment of his medium, his country, or both.With a bit of effort, it’s possible to make Scripture imply almost anything you want it to, and the gifted, intensely odd Canadian cartoonist Chester Brown has performed an impressive feat of creative reinterpretation with MARY WEPT OVER THE FEET OF JESUS: Prostitution and Religious Obedience in the Bible (Drawn & Quarterly, $21.95). Brown has been fascinated with both elements of his subject for a long time: Prostitution was the subject of his 2011 memoir, “Paying for It,” and his early comics included remarkable adaptations of the Gospels of Mark and Matthew. His argument here is essentially that both Jesus’ mother, Mary, and Mary of Bethany were prostitutes, that God favors those who disobey Him in the interest of a loving life and that the Bible has been redacted to obscure both assertions.As biblical scholarship goes, this seems fairly iffy. (Brown chides other scholars for recounting stories with “fanciful elements seemingly of their own invention,” even as he notes that he changed details in the parable of the prodigal son “to reflect how I think Jesus told it.”) As art, on the other hand, it’s pretty wonderful. As Brown’s extensive (hand-lettered) endnotes explain, the book grew out of what was initially intended to be a self-published minicomic based on a lost variation on Jesus’ parable of the talents, cited by the fourth-century historian Eusebius. (Brown’s take on that parable — that the “good and faithful servant” was one who spent all of his master’s money on prostitutes and flute players — does indeed make for a more dramatically satisfying story than the familiar version.)The bulk of the book is Brown’s adaptations of Bible stories, some very familiar and others less so, all given some degree of explicitly interpretive spin. His evenhanded pace of four small panels on each page keeps the tone understated, and he gets a lot of comedic mileage out of rendering biblical dialogue into modern vernacular. (Jesus, on being told that he should be anointed, replies, “I don’t know — I’m not into ceremonies.”) But Brown zeros in on the human drama in each story — his images of David silently regarding Bathsheba make very clear the way power flows between them — and his visual craftsmanship is as sharp as it’s ever been. Brown’s drawing on the book’s front cover alludes to the historiated initials of illuminated manuscripts, even as it presents the Bible as a clitoris.The only section of “Mary Wept” that’s entirely speculation on Brown’s part concerns Matthew working on his Gospel, wondering how to hint that Mary had been a prostitute without having that revelation censored by scribes, and deciding to invent a genealogy for Jesus that included several women who “took the sexual initiative for social advantage . . . I hope that, eventually, readers with eyes to see will understand.” He hid his meaning well if it took close to 2,000 years for a curious artist to catch on.As a child, the British novelist Evie Wyld spent part of her time on the Australian coast, visiting her family, relaxing on the beach and having terrible fantasies about shark attacks. EVERYTHING IS TEETH (Pantheon, $24.95) is a lyrical reminiscence of her youthful fixation with sharks and with the conservationist and shark-attack survivor Rodney Fox. (The cover, following an unwelcome trend in publishing, follows Wyld’s name with “illustrated by Joe Sumner,” in smaller lettering. To read their collaboration, though, is to experience Sumner’s artwork at least as much as Wyld’s sparse, reflective narration.) Wyld’s fearful childhood visions are juxtaposed with her actual encounters with sharks: variously dead and beached, or small and helpless on her uncle’s fishing line, but never causing her as much trouble as a jellyfish that stings her.Sumner’s artwork here is mostly as broad and plain as a woodcut, black lines augmented with nothing but pale sand-yellow and sky blue; he draws Wyld and her family with circular heads and blunted triangles for noses. But when the sharks and other scary sea creatures turn up, he renders them in detail, and sometimes with a full spectrum of color. The water where a shark has been turns red — although the largest crimson pool we see in the book is one that ripples outward from a butchered pregnant shark.“If I think the worst,” Wyld notes as she plunges into one of her awful reveries, “then the worst is unlikely to happen.” Her sentences — often just two or three of them on each page — are clean and subdued, with an occasional poetic swerve: “I get in up to my knees and the sun turns my hair to hot bread.” The bloody fantasy of a shark encounter gives her young self something to cling to in the face of the ambiguous real-world violence she can’t quite grasp: When her older brother comes home from being beaten up, Evie tells him stories of shark attacks to calm them both down.Famous in his native France and nearly unknown here, the cartoonist who goes by Blutch (real name: Christian Hincker) has a magnificently expressive line, so bold and ragged that it often looks as if he’s snapped his brush in half and is mashing its splintered end into the drawing board. Of his two dozen or so books, his 1998 graphic novel PEPLUM (New York Review Comics, paper, $24.95) is only his second to appear in English.The “peplum” is a nearly extinct, peculiarly European genre: Greco-Roman adventure stories of the sort that once featured the strongman Maciste or starred Steve Reeves. But those are romantic stories about power and sweat, and this one is all gore, mud, seasickness and failure. The Roman skies Blutch draws are full of flies and carrion birds. His characters are always seen in moments of physical extremity: rage or supplication or despair. Their bodies wrestle together as if they’re half-melted rubber, or are piled high as agonized corpses. Edward Gauvin’s translation suggests the diction of classical drama (“My chest was bathed in tears from my chagrin”) — aside from a scene of Julius Caesar’s assassination, whose dialogue comes from Shakespeare.The story is presented in brief, brutal flashes, as if it’s the surviving fragments of a longer work (like Petronius’ “Satyricon,” from which Blutch draws elements of Peplum’s plot). Around the time Caesar falls, a group of bandits abscond with the body of a beautiful woman frozen in ice. A year later, the gang’s last survivor takes the name of one of his dead associates, Publius Cimber. What follows is an escalating pyramid of horrors: plague, betrayal, the dreadful giggling of the mad. The false Publius travels with his lover, a young man who looks like the woman in the ice, and then betrays him to save the unattainable, frozen object of his passion. An actor’s dance becomes a slaughter; a bathing nymph turns out to be one of a cluster of handless maenads. Everything in “Peplum” is eroticized, and nothing can be consummated.Lucy Knisley’s books are memoirs of a happy life: airy, chatty communiqués about her experiences with travel and cooking and family. SOMETHING NEW: Tales from a Makeshift Bride (First Second, $19.99) documents the year leading up to her wedding, and her attempts to make it, as she puts it, “something I recognize as my own, rather than something that is happening to me.”Knisley had reservations about both the institution of marriage and the cash-draining machinery of the wedding industry; she and her fiancé had dated for a few years and broken up for a while before he proposed to her. Nonetheless, she found herself caught up in the vortex of wedding planning, and most of the book details various aspects of that process, from arranging the food to flushing moths out of the barn where the ceremony was to take place to reconciling the idea of getting married with her feminist ideals. It’s digressive, meandering and entirely charming — her comics read like a letter one treasures.The prevailing tone of “Something New” is whimsy. The thin, clear lines and flat watercolor shades of Knisley’s artwork make everything look cute and happy, and she takes every opportunity to poke at the excesses of bridal-­marketing madness. (A double-page image of “Popular Bridal Hairstyles” starts out fairly straightforwardly and rapidly spirals into lunacy: “Lady Dwarf Style,” “Bridal Croissant”). This is not a particularly dramatic book — nothing really goes awry on Knisley’s route to the altar, aside from some rain and a few squabbles with her mom.That’s fine: It’s a story about a celebration, and Knisley’s work is naturally celebratory. Nearly every panel includes a playful symbolic or metaphorical image; she happily pauses her narrative to explain how to make poutine, or to diagram the crafts projects she made for her bridesmaids, or to quote a friend’s funny movie summaries. And for someone who initially had so many reservations about the complicated machinery of a traditional wedding, she ends up finding the fun in nearly every aspect of it. After some angst over picking a wedding dress, she discovers one that’s not only comfortable and attractive but (as she rhapsodizes for several pages) has pockets. “On sale, the dress cost less than an Ikea bookshelf,” she notes, with a sketch of an efficient Swedish gown box labeled “GÜWN.”Mark Beyer’s “Amy and Jordan” was one of the great underground comic strips of the late ’80s and early ’90s — the Candide-on-PCP misadventures of a seemingly accursed New York City couple. (Beyer’s crudely rendered characters are two-dimensional in a way that makes them seem to have been violently squished flat, but Amy’s the one with the checkerboard dress and Jordan’s wearing some sort of onesie with a target on his chest.) Initially published in 1987, the sour little gem AGONY (New York Review Comics, paper, $15.95) is the only book-length Amy-and-Jordan story. As Colson Whitehead’s introduction to the new edition suggests, it’s hilarious if you’re in the right mood for its gleeful parade of atrocities and deadpan expository dialogue (“Well Amy, we’ve reattached your severed head and have also reattached Jordan’s legs. You’ll both be well enough to go home again in a few days”).The story begins with the unhappy couple’s being fired for “gross incompetence”; within the first quarter of the book, they’re attacked by a “hideous ghoul creature,” eaten by a giant fish, shipped off on a freighter full of sled dogs and mauled by a bear. Nonetheless, through all their humiliations and dismemberments, they try to stay optimistic. When a doctor explains that Amy has sustained permanent brain damage from being brutalized by a prison guard, Jordan is sanguine about it: “She’s always been disoriented and mentally confused. It doesn’t sound so bad.”Beyer’s artwork exemplifies the warped underside of 1980s design — painstakingly hand-drawn new-wave patterns and textures are everywhere, and most of the book’s settings are rendered in perversely mutated perspective. For that matter, his characters’ blithe acceptance of the horrific abuse the world heaps on them is emblematic of the late Cold War era, when apocalypse seemed to lurk at every turn. Even the rare good things that happen to Amy and Jordan are unfair caprices of fate; the only real way to cope with powerlessness in the face of disaster, Beyer suggests, is to giggle at its absurdity.