http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/25/business/economy/christine-lagarde-new-imf-chief-rocks-the-boat.html
Lagarde, New I.M.F. Chief, Rocks the Boat - The New York Times
Lagarde  Christine,International Monetary Fund,European Sovereign Debt Crisis (2010- ),Euro (Currency),European Union,Banking and Financial Institutions
Sept. 24, 2011
9364
MARSEILLE, FranceEARLIER this month a phalanx of limousines and black vans lined up near the Palais du Pharo, an imposing Napoleonic-era chateau here whose chandeliered halls had been temporarily transformed into a bunker.Chauffeurs had just dropped off precious cargo — the dark-suited finance ministers of Germany, France, the United States and the four other wealthy nations that form the Group of 7. The officials were gathering for a working dinner to talk about the swirling European debt crisis, which, despite their concerted efforts, seems to worsen by the day.Their eyes soon turned toward Christine Lagarde, the new managing director of the International Monetary Fund. Not so long ago, she was one of them. But almost as soon as she crossed the Atlantic to take up her post in Washington, she had morphed into someone who now slightly bewildered them.Ms. Lagarde had gone independent.In the few short months since becoming the first woman to lead the monetary fund, Ms. Lagarde, 55, had taken her former European colleagues to task for not talking with a single voice to save the euro. In speech after speech, she had warned that the austerity that Europe was pressing on Greece and its debt-weakened neighbors was choking economic growth and needed to be tamed.Worse, as far as the men seated in the room were concerned, Ms. Lagarde was partly responsible for the collapse of confidence bedeviling the financial markets. She had dared to state what few of them would admit publicly: European banks were not as sheltered from this storm as they might seem.Was this the International Monetary Fund talking? It was now, under Ms. Lagarde. As the future of the euro hangs in the balance, she is emerging as a European who is willing to speak openly about Europe’s problems.If Greece defaults on its government debt, as many predict, and Europe’s banks stumble, as some fear, the reverberations would be felt around the world. The next domino would be Italy, itself a member of the Group of 7. The Obama administration, alarmed by the possible spillover effects, is pressing European leaders to act decisively.The monetary fund is already overseeing multibillion-euro bailouts in Greece, Ireland and Portugal — a situation that would have been unthinkable just three years ago. So, as much as anyone, Ms. Lagarde will help determine whether the union that has bound 17 European nations together, in the biggest postwar effort to ensure peace through economic stability, survives.“Her first couple of months have been reassuring for those who feared the appointment of a European from a euro zone economy at a time of crisis,” says Simon Tilford, the chief economist of the Center for European Reform, a London research group that supports European integration. “She recognizes that the I.M.F. has to distance itself from the euro zone policy elite and its strategy for the crisis, which is clearly not working.”At the annual meetings of the monetary fund and the World Bank continuing in Washington, Europe has dominated the discussion. In an announcement that added to the gloom in world markets last week, the fund cut its forecast for global growth and warned of worldwide economic repercussions if Europe couldn’t solve its debt problem soon. Ms. Lagarde’s lieutenant, the monetary fund’s chief economist, Olivier Blanchard, said the Continent needed to “get its act together.”WHETHER MS. LAGARDE can do much to contain this crisis is uncertain. Sometimes her blunt talk has made a bad situation worse, and she has backpedaled after overstepping her bounds. In August, the share prices of Société Générale, Deutsche Bank, and many other big European banks tumbled after she proclaimed that European banks were in “urgent” need of capital.Irritated European officials and an even angrier banking establishment scrambled to control the damage. Christian Noyer, the governor of the French central bank and a friend of Ms. Lagarde, declared: “Quite frankly, I don’t understand what she said.”Now, on this sweltering September evening in Marseille, finance officials pressed Ms. Lagarde to ease up. A senior American official let it be known that the monetary fund was starting to retreat on estimates that Europe’s banks might need at least 200 billion euros of capital. The next day, Ms. Lagarde appeared before reporters to say that that figure was “tentative,” and that the monetary fund was now discussing the final numbers with its European partners.Ms. Lagarde has backed off in the past. But this time, she did not climb down from her principal point: That many banks still need a bigger cushion against potential losses in the event of a Greek default. Last week, the monetary fund warned that Europe’s banks had as much as 300 billion euros at risk on various European government bonds but stopped short of saying they needed to raise that much in new capital.Whatever the figure, it is almost certainly far more than the 2.5 billion euros that European regulators said the banks might need last spring. For some, the fact that so many European leaders are biting back proves that Ms. Lagarde has touched a nerve.“It’s a long time coming that the I.M.F. called a spade a spade when it comes to the banking sector,” says Kenneth Rogoff, a professor of economics at Harvard and a former chief economist for the fund. “They know there’s a problem and they don’t want to acknowledge it.”Another former monetary fund economist, Simon Johnson, says it is too soon to know if Ms. Lagarde will succeed. “We need at least another month or two to get a fix on who she is and what she will achieve,” he says.IN A SENSE, Ms. Lagarde has something to atone for. Her record on divining trouble was spotty while she was France’s finance minister. In the days before Lehman Brothers collapsed, for instance, she assured the French that the worst was already over. Last July, she predicted that financial stress tests would show that European banks were "solid and healthy," and declared that French banks were among the soundest.Indeed, as Greece began to stumble, Ms. Lagarde was among those who planted the seeds of the problems that are now destabilizing Europe. She joined the French establishment in acquiescing to a German blueprint for responding to the crisis. That plan called for tax increases and deep spending cuts in countries that were already so weak that they needed bailouts from wealthier neighbors and the monetary fund.Later, after disclosures that Greece had cooked its books to join the euro — an open secret in European financial circles — Ms. Lagarde warned that the country was at risk of default if it didn’t do “more to bring its public finances in order.” She sided with the European Central Bank in resisting any restructuring of Greece’s debts.That plan, many experts now agree, magnified the crisis by placing impossible demands on Greece, and fanned concern that bigger economies, like Italy and Spain, might be engulfed by the crisis too. That has come back to haunt banks in Ms. Lagarde’s home of France, which bought large amounts of European government bonds.Meanwhile, the push for austerity has angered citizens in Greece and other countries. Some observers expect that the backlash might lead to a rise of far-right politicians over time.“In that sense, she’s culpable,” Mr. Tilford says. “By backing the strategy of fiscal austerity, she has helped push some economies that were in a bad situation over the edge, and caused a profound loss of confidence that has pushed the crisis into the core of the euro zone.”Since those days, Ms. Lagarde seems to have seen the writing on the wall. One of her most surprising acts at the International Monetary Fund has been an about-face on austerity. The fund historically has compelled poor nations to reduce spending and raise taxes in exchange for its help. It has changed its tune for wealthier ones. Amid prolonged recessions and rising unemployment, Ms. Lagarde is advising the United States and Europe to stimulate growth and create jobs through new government spending, even if that spending temporarily inflates the public debt.Lawrence H. Summers, the former economic adviser to President Obama, says Ms. Lagarde is making the right call. She is breaking with International Monetary Fund orthodoxy, he says.“The I.M.F. has traditionally said cutting budget deficits is the solution to problems,” Mr. Summers says. Ms. Lagarde’s reversal is a “welcome change in thinking, emphasizing that we should be establishing a basis for growth.”Ms. Lagarde said she was too busy to sit for an interview for this article but responded to questions via e-mail. ”Everyone — including markets — realize that commitments to cut spending cannot survive a lengthy stagnation with prolonged high unemployment and social dissatisfaction,” she wrote.But Ms. Lagarde also made what many view as another questionable call before arriving at the monetary fund. One of the biggest problems with Europe’s currency union is that no mechanism was ever put in place to ease a swift transfer of money from big countries like Germany to troubled ones like Greece. Neither Germany nor France was willing to cede an ounce of sovereignty to see that through.As the crisis snowballed, people like Mario Draghi, the Italian who will become the head of the European Central Bank in November, have called for the creation of bonds backed by countries in the euro union as a way around this problem.Germany balked and, early on, Ms. Lagarde’s response was an almost unequivocal “non.” Late last year, when the idea started circulating, she said she “absolutely” did not want to see these bonds created — at least not until a more common economic governance has been put in place by the euro club’s members. Now that the Europeans are pushing the idea again, financial markets are hoping that these bonds could provide a solution.Ms. Lagarde has remained silent. Last week, the monetary fund said Europe should hold off until euro countries are more closely knit.But she continues to harp on Europe. “Europe needs a common vision for its future,” she wrote via e-mail. “Put simply, it needs more Europe, not less.”That is a message that she delivered for the last couple of years from the French finance ministry, where her offices were adorned with a zebra-striped rug and caricatures of her from various publications, including one depicting her as a dominatrix whipping a banker.At one point, she pressed her message so hard that she ticked off another powerful woman in Europe: Angela Merkel, the chancellor of Germany. While Ms. Lagarde’s former boss, France’s president, Nicolas Sarkozy, has had a tumultuous relationship with Mrs. Merkel, Ms. Lagarde has nurtured a close personal relationship with her. The women are on first-name terms. But their friendship was strained last spring when Ms. Lagarde noted that Germany was at least partly to blame for the deepening divide in Europe.Germany became an economic powerhouse in part by exporting so much to weaker countries like Spain. But, now that economies like Spain’s were in trouble, she said, Germany was refusing to buy imports.The solution, Ms. Lagarde insisted, was for Berlin to lift domestic consumption. “When there is an effort to make an interdependent economic zone such as the euro zone,” Ms. Lagarde said at the time, “everybody must make an effort.” The result was a scathing backlash in the German press, and a lot of huffing around Mrs. Merkel’s office.Back in Paris, she was advised not to rock the boat further. But she was used to that: as a woman who did not come from France’s Grandes Écoles, like nearly every French politician, policy maker and corporate chief, she had long been labeled an outsider and was sometimes accused of being out of her depth on economic issues. The former head of Baker & McKenzie, the big law firm based in Chicago, she lived in the United States for six years, from 1999 to 2005. The stint earned her the moniker “l’Américaine” among French who did not necessarily see an American tour as a plus.And, amid all the troubles in Europe, a French court recently opened an investigation into whether Ms. Lagarde abused her power as finance minister in 2007 by intervening in a legal dispute involving a prominent businessman and hundreds of millions of dollars in state money. The monetary fund’s board was aware that a case might be opened when it selected her.Since Ms. Lagarde’s German gaffe, Mr. Sarkozy has made an effort to trumpet the unity between France and Germany, giving Mrs. Merkel air kisses in front of cameras or grasping her on the arm. Tall and stylish, with an elegant wardrobe that is adorned by Chanel jackets, Hermès sacs and Christian Louboutin heels, Ms. Lagarde was also accused by members of the mostly male French establishment of studying her clothes more than her dossiers. During her candidacy for the International Monetary Fund, when asked if Ms. Lagarde would get the job, Laurent Fabius, a former finance minister, said: “She’ll make it. She’s an elegant woman.” The French press jumped on the snub.ONCE at the monetary fund, Ms. Lagarde hopped back on her soapbox. Warning that the economic crisis has entered “a dangerous new phase” — a catch phrase she repeated several times during the fund meetings — she insists that further steps are needed to strengthen the euro zone.“There is no room for ambivalence about the future direction,” she said via e-mail. “An unclear or confused message will add to market uncertainty and magnify economic tensions.”All this came back to the fore last week in Washington, when she met many of the same men she had confronted at the Palais du Pharo, as well as troupes of other finance ministers from around the globe.This time, the circumstances were different. The last set of monetary fund meetings was overseen by Dominique Strauss-Kahn, who resigned in May to deal with charges of attempted rape. Ms. Lagarde allowed him to return to the fund to apologize to a cynical staff, and bid adieu before he returned to France, where he used his first television interview since the scandal to hold forth on the European crisis.At the International Monetary Fund, the D.S.K. chapter is considered closed. There is a feeling among employees that Ms. Lagarde has risen to the occasion, and the talk about her being too European has dissipated. “People feel like there is a leader, there’s a boss,” one monetary fund official says.Ms. Lagarde has moved full steam ahead with a multitude of speeches, television appearances and profiles in magazines as heavy as Der Spiegel and as glossy as Vogue. Some media have embraced her as proof that a woman can pay attention to world affairs as well as her wardrobe without losing credibility. A recent Huffington Post photo montage of Ms. Lagarde’s “Proudly Parisian Styles” drew gushing comments from readers.Still, Ms. Lagarde faces a long road. But in a speech on Sept. 15 at the Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington, she signaled that the monetary fund wouldn’t back down. The fund, she said, could help during a crisis “by turning up the heat at times.”