http://www.nytimes.com/2009/11/09/world/middleeast/09yemen.html
Saudis Claim to Beat Back Yemeni Rebels in Border Area - The New York Times
Saudi Arabia,Houthis,Yemen,Defense and Military Forces
Nov. 8, 2009
8522
BEIRUT, Lebanon — Saudi Arabia said over the weekend that it had regained control of a border area seized by Yemeni rebels last week, and that it had halted its military campaign there.But the Houthi rebels dismissed the Saudi claims on Sunday, saying Saudi troops had “collapsed” and retreated from the area. The rebels’ statement, issued on the Internet, came with a video of a Saudi armored personnel carrier burning, and of what was said to be fleeing Saudi soldiers.The competing claims left a veil of uncertainty over the episode, in which Saudi Arabia — stung by rebel incursions — carried out its first unilateral military campaign in decades. The fighting began on Tuesday when the rebels overran a strategic mountain area on the Yemeni-Saudi border known as Jebel Dukhan, killing a Saudi border guard and wounding 11 others. Another border guard later died of his wounds.Saudi Arabia then began bombing rebel positions, introducing a new international element to Yemen’s five-year-old civil war with the rebels.On Saturday, Saudi Arabia’s assistant minister for defense and aviation, Prince Khaled bin Sultan bin Abdulaziz, said “the situation is calm, especially in Jebel Dukhan, of which full control has been regained,” according to the state-owned Saudi Press Agency.Prince Khaled said three Saudi soldiers had been killed and 15 wounded in the fighting. He added four Saudi soldiers were missing, the press agency reported, but he dismissed Houthi claims that they had been captured.The border area is remote, dangerous and closed to journalists, making it impossible to verify either side’s claims.Even if the fighting has ended, it seems likely that violence could flare up again, analysts said. The Houthis claim they initially seized the Jebel Dukhan area because the Saudis were allowing the Yemeni Army to use it for attacks on them — a tactic that may well be repeated.“Has Saudi Arabia simply opened a Pandora’s box, and laid the foundation for the Houthis to continue fighting them?” said Toby C. Jones, an expert on Saudi Arabia and professor of Middle Eastern history at Rutgers University.The episode has attracted widespread attention in part because of Yemen’s claims that Iran is supporting the Houthi rebels, raising the specter of a possible proxy war between Iran and Saudi Arabia.But Yemeni officials have not offered any evidence of Iranian involvement, and the Houthis have always denied it. The Houthis are Zaydis, an offshoot of Shiite Islam that is doctrinally closer to mainstream Sunnism than to the Shiism practiced in Iran. However, the dominant form of Islam in Saudi Arabia is hostile to any form of Shiism.