https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/23/world/europe/vladimir-putin-russia-press-conference.html
Vladimir Putin, Unsurprised by Trump’s Remarks, Says Russia Wants No Nuclear Arms Race - The New York Times
International Relations,Putin  Vladimir V,Russia,Presidential Election of 2016,Clinton  Hillary Rodham
Dec. 23, 2016
2213
MOSCOW — President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said on Friday that a statement by Donald J. Trump, the American president-elect, that the United States should expand its nuclear abilities was not a surprise because he had said the same thing during the election campaign.Asked about the American election, Mr. Putin, who has made no secret of his distaste for Hillary Clinton, said her defeat was a “humiliation” for the Democratic Party.The Russian president, speaking at his annual marathon news conference, also said that Russia would continue to modernize its armed forces, including nuclear weapons, but he added that the level of spending would diminish somewhat in coming years.He said Russia was not seeking a new arms race or to develop new nuclear warheads, but was instead seeking ways to improve its armaments so that they could pierce missile defenses. The deployment of NATO missile defense systems in countries near Russia has been a sore spot between Moscow and the West.Mr. Putin said again, as he had on Thursday, that the Russian armed forces were now strong enough to repulse any attacker. He suggested that officials from the Obama administration had overreacted by pointing out that the Russian military was far weaker than that of the United States.“Of course the U.S. has more missiles, submarines and aircraft carriers, but what we say is that we are stronger than any aggressor, and this is the case,” Mr. Putin said toward the beginning of the news conference, which typically lasts four hours or more.“As for Donald Trump, there is nothing new about it, during his election campaign he said the U.S. needs to bolster its nuclear capabilities and its armed forces in general,” he added.Mr. Putin said that any new Russian nuclear weapons would stay within the limits of existing treaties. Although Moscow and Washington have taken to rattling sabers more than in the past, experts said that the architecture of previous nuclear arms treaties has so far held.In 2007, Russia spent 2.7 percent of its gross domestic product on defense, Mr. Putin said, but the figure grew to 4.7 percent in 2016. Russia spent about $52 billion on its military in 2015.He said that the proportion would gradually decline to 2.8 percent again by 2019. “This will not have an impact on our plan to increase our defense capabilities,” he said.The budget cuts are being forced by an extended recession, though Mr. Putin tried to put a positive spin on that, as well. He said the overall economy had contracted 3.7 percent in 2015 and probably a further 0.5 to 0.6 percent in 2016, but that some sectors were expanding, like agriculture, which grew 4 percent.He said this had happened despite Western sanctions imposed on Russia over the Ukraine crisis. In retaliation, Russia has banned imports of many Western dairy and other agricultural products.Some analysts have suggested that the growth in agriculture was nothing exceptional.Mr. Putin also noted other positive signs, including that inflation and capital outflows had slowed, but he said that there were still problems, including a drop in personal income for most Russians.On the American election, Mr. Putin said the Democrats were trying to blame their defeat on external factors like Russia. He said his popularity among American Republicans was not personal, but a reflection of their worldview.“It means that a significant part of the American people have the same perception about how the world should be developing,” he said. “It is good that people support us in this, in terms of traditional values.” He said it was a good basis for improving Russian-American relations.Mr. Putin mocked recent statements by President Obama and others that former President Ronald Reagan would be turning in his grave over the support for Russia and for Mr. Putin among Republicans.If anything, he said, it would be former presidents like Franklin D. Roosevelt who would be turning in their graves over the losses suffered by the Democratic Party.Mr. Roosevelt united the country, Mr. Putin said, but “the current administration divides it.”The Obama administration has accused Russia of interfering in the American election, not least by hacking the computers at the Democratic National Committee and releasing emails embarrassing to Mrs. Clinton.Although Mr. Putin did not publicly endorse either candidate during the campaign, his administration made its preference for Mr. Trump clear. Among other reasons for disliking Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Putin has blamed her for the street demonstrations in Russia in 2011 and 2012 that greeted his return to the presidency, citing her endorsement of the protests while she was secretary of state to accuse her of fostering them.Asked directly about statements by Mr. Obama that he had warned Mr. Putin to stop hacking in the United States, Mr. Putin said that he would not reveal the contents of a private conversation.But he repeated statements by Mr. Trump that anyone could have done the hacking, including someone in the United States sitting on his couch. And Mr. Putin repeated his usual response to questions about the hacking, saying the main point was the contents of the emails and the light they shed on the Democrats’ activities and plans.