https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/22/arts/hong-kong-tram-art-project-kingsley-ng.html
In Hong Kong, a Streetcar That Cuts a Path Through Time - The New York Times
Hong Kong,Art Basel (Festival),Ng  Kingsley
March 22, 2017
7848
Public trams have been chugging through the steep, winding streets of Hong Kong for more than 110 years. Originally, they ran along the coast of the island, but as land was reclaimed from the sea to build the city outward, they became increasingly concentrated in the interior.“The tramline is now submerged in the concrete jungle of the city,” said the Hong Kong artist Kingsley Ng, who sees the trams as a kind of time capsule of local history. He uses them for “Twenty-Five Minutes Older,” a site-specific conceptual work that takes passengers on a journey through the city to “explore the passage of time.”By covering the exterior of a tram and allowing light to enter only through small pinholes, he has turned the vehicle into a mobile camera obscura, in which the outside scenery and street are projected onto the interior walls, but inverted and reversed.“The rider will experience the tram moving forward, but at the same time see a panorama of imagery pass, inverted and reversed in real time,” Mr. Ng said. “There is a real-time perception of time moving both forward and backward.”The work lasts about 25 minutes and explores how “a city gets old, people get old, something doesn’t,” Mr. Ng wrote in his artistic statement. The title of the work also refers to a 10-minute documentary by the Latvian director Herz Frank called “Ten Minutes Older” (1978), which focuses on the faces of young children watching a play.The project is among the featured public presentations of this year’s Art Basel Hong Kong. Mr. Ng previously presented the work in “The Fifth Large-Scale Public Media Arts Exhibition: Human Vibration,” in 2016.Art Basel, which brings a surge of international visitors to the city each year, provides Mr. Ng with an opportunity to present his tram project to a much larger audience. This time, two trams will offer free rides daily between Causeway Bay and Western Market in Sheung Wan through March 28.Mr. Ng was born in Hong Kong, moved to Canada when he was young and was mostly educated in the West. He said he took inspiration from the Fluxus movement artist Joseph Beuys, the conceptual artist Hans Haacke, the composer John Cage and the art critic and writer John Berger. Mr. Ng returned to Hong Kong about 10 years ago and has more recently started exploring the ancient Chinese poetry of Lu Ji.“There is tremendous wisdom in the East, and the more I dive into these things, the more I can discover,” he said.For “Twenty-Five Minutes Older,” Mr. Ng has drawn on a more modern Chinese writer, the novelist Liu Yichang. Spoken extracts from his popular stream-of-consciousness novella “Tête-Bêche” provide a soundtrack for the moving trams.Mr. Ng says his work is related to something known as urban acupuncture, a concept borrowed from architecture. The idea is that the urban landscape is a kind of physical body whose energy can be affected by pressure points.“When I’m creating works, I try to look into how to identify the meridian, or the idea of chi, or energy flow, and how that may be another way of looking at the public sphere,” Mr. Ng said.Valerie Doran, an independent curator and a critic based in Hong Kong, said she saw connections in his work to that of other Chinese contemporary artists, including the art collectives Yangjiang Group, Para Site and Woofer Ten, which have a strong attachment to a sense of place in the urban environment.“I could use words like ‘Confucianist’ to describe his work,” Ms. Doran said in a telephone interview. “He creates a space for a certain kind of meditation within the daily life experience.”At the same time, she said, Mr. Ng’s work is linked to Chinese new media art, a movement that has developed rapidly over the last 30 years, but which began with the establishment of the avant-garde theater collective Zuni Icosahedron in 1982. One of the group’s first members, Ellen Pau, was a founder of Videotage, an important platform for experimentation.Amira Gad, a curator at the Serpentine Galleries in London, said that Mr. Ng’s project, and the philosophy behind it, was “representative of the dual characteristic of the current Chinese cultural scene,” combining modern technological innovation with ancient spiritual teachings.Ms. Gad likened Mr. Ng’s work to a 2015 video by the Beijing-based multimedia artist Cao Fei, “Rumba II: Nomad,” in which domestic vacuum-cleaning robots are deployed in an urban area that has been reduced to rubble. They try to create a semblance of order amid the chaos; in the meantime, a giant crane smashes apart the walls of a building nearby.“It’s a contrast between an urban landscape and this idea of a renewal, how to recreate and clean up the life and the world we’re living in,” Ms. Gad said.As for Mr. Ng, he sees his work as “a kind of light-touch intervention” in a city where some things have remained largely unchanged for a century.