http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/10/us/politics/a-congress-that-doesnt-want-to-weigh-in-on-war.html
A Congress That Doesn’t Want to Weigh In on War  - The New York Times
United States Defense and Military Forces,United States,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Terrorism,War and Emergency Powers (US),United States Politics and Government,House Committee on Armed Services,Ryan  Paul D Jr,Obama  Barack,Kaine  Timothy M,Graham  Lindsey,Carter  Ashton B,Congress
Dec. 9, 2015
9180
WASHINGTON —  Shortly after Paul D. Ryan became speaker, the chairmen of the House Armed Services and Intelligence Committees went to him with a difficult request: to help them put a bill on the House floor to authorize a war against the Islamic State extremist group.“When we send troops into battle, they need to know that they have the full backing of the government,” said Representative Mac Thornberry, Republican of Texas and chairman of the House Armed Services Committee.But Congress refuses to do what many lawmakers believe is its constitutional obligation: debate the meaning of war and vote on whether to authorize it.Mr. Ryan, while sympathetic to the argument that Congress has a responsibility to weigh in on military action abroad, told Mr. Thornberry and others that voting to authorize war was something very few members of Congress wanted to do.Instead, the House has voted to limit a refugee program for Syrians and to put some restrictions on visas for visitors from friendly nations. Lawmakers in the House and Senate are considering a host of other antiterrorism measures.“I’m tired of pretending we’re not at war and pushing the responsibility somewhere else,” said Senator Dan Coats, Republican of Indiana and one of the few senators on record in favor of a vote. “You’re asking our sons and daughters to take up our cause, and every person who is here has to decide with their own conscience if that’s something we’re going to do.”In an address from the Oval Office on Sunday night, President Obama again asked Congress to officially authorize the use of military force abroad. While White House officials have repeatedly said he does not need that authorization, which was previously granted after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the administration is seeking to project a united front with Congress against the terrorist threat.“For over a year, I have ordered our military to take thousands of airstrikes against ISIL targets,” Mr. Obama said, using an acronym for the Islamic State. “I think it’s time for Congress to vote, to demonstrate that the American people are united and committed to this fight.”But Democrats and Republicans are largely resisting his call. A bipartisan measure in the Senate has gained no support from members other than the two who wrote it, and a more conservative version offered by Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina has only a handful of Republican backers.Republicans are loath to give Mr. Obama more authority because they are highly critical of his strategy in Syria, and Democrats are still stinging from the vote in 2002 to authorize the war in Iraq. Even among supporters, there are partisan divisions, with Democrats preferring a measure that would limit the president’s authority and Republicans preferring to allow a more robust use of force.Members of both parties, especially the Republicans who control Congress, fear that a high-profile debate followed by a failed vote to authorize force would be a disastrous public display of division, perhaps emboldening enemies abroad. Lawmakers and Mr. Obama were embarrassed in 2013 when Congress did not authorize airstrikes against President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.“There are not many things that we do that are more important,” said Senator Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona, who has been pushing for a measure for months with Senator Tim Kaine, Democrat of Virginia. Mr. Flake said that most members of Congress simply did not want to take a tough vote. “That is the most accurate explanation there is,” he said. “It’s unfortunate, but I think that’s it.”Mr. Flake and others believe that after the recent attacks in Paris and in San Bernardino, Calif., and with the new push from Mr. Obama, Congress may feel pressure to step up in the new year.“I think it’s a very good idea,” said Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York. “All we’ve been hearing from the Republican side is that the president is not doing enough, so an A.U.M.F. forces Republicans to outline their proposals.”On Wednesday, Mr. Kaine pressed the issue with Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter on Capitol Hill. “I think it is desirable,” Mr. Carter said. “And by the way, it’s a signal of resolve to our enemies.”Congress voted to authorize force both in 2001, to respond to the terrorist attacks, and in 2002, for the invasion of Iraq. The Obama administration has long said that those measures provide all the authority it needs for new uses of force, and many lawmakers agree.When the administration asked for another vote last year, Speaker John A. Boehner was eager to help, but Republicans rejected the wording offered by the White House. “They came up with this goofy language that no one can define,” Mr. Thornberry said.The Senate Foreign Relations Committee passed a resolution authorizing military force against the Islamic State for up to three years but limiting ground combat operations to “defined circumstances.” It never made it to the Senate floor.Interest may be growing in the House, where members are expected to offer another bipartisan measure this week. “We owe our constituents, and particularly the brave Americans who wear the uniform, an honest debate about the nature of the threat we face and the strength, determination and resilience that will be required of all Americans to defeat ISIL,” said Representative Tammy Duckworth, Democrat of Illinois, who is running for the Senate and is an Iraq war veteran. “Congress owes them a vote on authorizing the use of military force against ISIL.”Congressional authorization of force generally applies to a specific nation, like Iraq, not to a broad region or a mobile threat like the one the Islamic State presents. “This is a very tight rope for the Obama administration to be walking,” said Nora Bensahel, a military policy analyst at American University’s School of International Service.“When the initial draft was sent to the Hill, the big criticism was that it was too open-ended in terms of what he would authorize,” Ms. Bensahel said. “And he said, ‘We just want support that reflects a new era of a constant and ongoing shift in threat.’ That is not a political comment. It reflects the fact that radical Islamic terror groups have been morphing and changing.”“The debate is not something that individual citizens will get excited about,” she added, “but it is a fundamental part of our political process.”