https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/magazine/why-were-this-mans-muscles-weak-and-his-body-covered-with-pink-dots.html
Why Were This Man’s Muscles Weak and His Body Covered With Pink Dots? - The New York Times
Tests (Medical),Emergency Medical Treatment,Muscles,Guillain-Barre Syndrome
May 17, 2017
8813
The woman woke to the sound of her 57-year-old husband sobbing. They’d been married for 30 years, and she had never heard him cry before. “I hurt so much,” he wailed. “I have to go back to the hospital.”The symptoms started two weeks earlier. One afternoon, coming home from his job as a carpenter, he felt hot and tired. He shook with shivers even though the day was warm. He drank a cup of tea and went to bed. The next day he felt fine, until the end of the day, when he felt overwhelmed by the heat and chills again. The day after that was the same. When he woke one morning and saw that his body was covered with pale pink dots — his arms, his face, his chest and thighs — he started to worry. His wife took him to the Griffin Hospital emergency room in Derby, Conn.The first doctor who saw him thought he probably had Lyme disease. Summer had just started, and he’d already seen a lot of cases. He sent the patient home with an antibiotic and steroid pills for the rash. The man took the medications but didn’t get any better. Soon everything started to hurt. His muscles, his joints and his back felt as if he’d been beaten. He dragged himself back to the E.R. He was given pain pills. A few days later, he went to the E.R. a third time and was given more pain meds. After waking up crying, he went yet again, and this time, the doctors admitted him. By then the patient had had several blood tests, which showed no sign of Lyme or other tick-borne diseases. A CT scan was equally uninformative.The next day, the man was walking to the bathroom when his legs gave out and he fell down. The doctor in charge of his care came and examined him once again. The man looked fit and healthy, despite the now-bright-red rash, but his legs were extremely weak. If the doctor applied even light pressure to the raised leg, it sagged back down to the bed. And his feet felt numb. He had a sensation of tingling in his hands, as if they had gone to sleep. That was how the weakness and numbness in his legs started, he told the doctor. And the next day, his hands were so weak he had to use both just to drink a cup of water.Dr. Howard Quentzel, the infectious-disease specialist, was called in. He immediately suspected that a virus was causing the body aches, weakness and rash. West Nile seemed most likely, but other viruses were possible as well: H.I.V. and E.B.V., the virus that causes mononucleosis. Or could it be Zika? The patient had not traveled south, but Zika was all over the news, so it came to mind. He sent off blood to test for these. When they came back negative, he suggested other possible infections to test for.The team reached out to Dr. James Butler, a neurologist. He was struck by the patient’s profound leg weakness and milder weakness in his hands and arms. He also noted that the patient had no reflexes at his knee or ankle joint. That suggested that whatever the problem was, it was affecting the nerve fibers in his arms and legs rather than in his brain or spine. Butler thought the patient might have Guillain-Barré syndrome (G.B.S.), an autoimmune disease. The neurologist liked to describe autoimmune diseases like G.B.S. as innocent-bystander illnesses. Cells in the body are just standing around, minding their own business, when something — maybe an infection or a stress on the body like an operation — triggers the immune system and starts the machinery that makes antibodies to fight the antagonist.But for reasons that are not well understood, one batch of newly minted antibodies mistakes a completely normal part of the body for the invading marauder and begins attacking these cells. In the case of Guillain-Barré, the innocent bystanders are the cells that encase and protect the nerves in the body, and their destruction causes the kind of symptoms this man had: weakness, numbness and tingling.But one thing was perplexing. Guillain-Barré doesn’t cause a rash. So did this man have an infection? Or G.B.S.? The two specialists weren’t sure. To help them decide, the doctors came up with a plan: They would order a spinal tap. If the fluid from around the spinal column had elevated white blood cells, that would indicate an infection. If it contained high levels of protein, those would likely be a result of rogue antibodies that cause autoimmune diseases, a finding more consistent with G.B.S.The results were just as confusing as the rest of the case. The fluid from the spinal tap had an abnormally high white-blood-cell count, suggesting an infection. But it also had an abnormally high protein count. The neurologist conceded that given the white blood cells, this probably was an infection. But as the results of tests for infectious diseases trickled in, not one was positive for any of the bacteria or viruses they had looked for.This is where things stood when Dr. Mehak Idrees, a physician trainee in her second year, took over the care of this patient. She was surprised to hear about him: Few patients stay in the hospital as long as he had, nearly two weeks, and even fewer stay that long without a diagnosis. Her new patient was a healthy looking man but still profoundly weak in his limbs. More ominously still, the numbness and tingling that preceded the weakness in his arms and legs had recently moved into his face. Was the weakness heading there too?She sat down with his extensive chart. The problem, as far as she could tell, was that the patient’s illness didn’t fit exactly into any single category. The team was stumped, so little had been done for the patient, besides treating his pain.Butler, the neurologist, had an interesting suggestion. Why not try treating the patient for G.B.S.? The treatment, an infusion of antibodies taken from thousands of donors, given once a day for five days, had been shown to help some with G.B.S. — though why it worked at all was not clearly understood. If the patient got stronger, that would suggest that he had G.B.S., and if he didn’t and actually had an infection, the treatment wouldn’t hurt him.On the first day, there was no improvement. Same on Days 2, 3 and 4. But on the last day, the patient noticed something. His weakness was unchanged, but the feeling of numbness in his face was gone. Was that enough to prove this was G.B.S.? The neurologist thought so. The infectious-disease doctor theorized that the man had a virus: one they hadn’t thought of, one they hadn’t tested for. The two doctors, along with Idrees, thought it was possible the patient had both — that he started out with some virus and then developed G.B.S. One point of agreement among the three was that something had injured the nerves in this man’s legs and arms, and that without a diagnosis, all they could do was wait and see if he got better.Uncertainty in medicine isn’t discussed much. We much prefer that the mystery is solved and the villainous ailment is blamed for the deed, or at least eliminated. A diagnosis is just a label unless it leads to a better understanding of prognosis or useful treatment. Those who have been to a doctor for a complicated problem will recognize the truth in this scenario: that far too often the diagnosis is unclear and the complexities of the body and of its illnesses cannot always be neatly categorized.When this patient left the hospital last summer, he was too weak to walk, too weak to even feed himself. Nearly a year has passed and after months of rehab, the patient can walk without assistance and his arms and legs, while still numb, are getting stronger. He works out with 15-pound weights at the gym. And he can climb the stairs on his own, though he still has to hold on to the banister tightly. Progress is slow, but he’s hopeful that his body will eventually recover all that it once had and was.