https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/07/business/dealbook/can-3g-capital-keep-thriving-on-acquisitions-and-cost-cutting.html
Can 3G Capital Keep Thriving on Acquisitions and Cost Cutting? - The New York Times
Mergers  Acquisitions and Divestitures,3G Capital Management LLC,Kraft Heinz Company,Tim Hortons,Private Equity
March 7, 2017
8585
The investment firm 3G Capital, the driving force behind Kraft Heinz and the company that owns the Burger King and Tim Hortons chains, seems to have found the secret sauce of deal-making.But could that sauce now be nearing its expiration date?Until recently, 3G looked unstoppable. Founded in 2004 by Jorge Paulo Lemann and four other Brazilian deal makers, the firm made its name by relentlessly crossing the globe to buy companies and ultimately form the world’s biggest beer maker, Anheuser-Busch InBev. Since then, 3G has built up empires in food through bold and aggressive acquisitions.But last month, 3G’s Kraft Heinz retreated on a $143 billion takeover offer for the British-Dutch conglomerate Unilever, the maker of Hellmann’s mayonnaise and Lipton tea, as well as Dove soap and other personal products, after facing opposition from the target company and European politicians.Still, 3G is not likely to shut down its insatiable acquisition drive after being thwarted over Unilever. Its recent setback provides an opportunity to reflect on what makes this firm different.The 3G machine has two main profit drivers. First, there is the tried-and-true merger play of becoming more profitable through consolidation and expansion into new markets. Then, the scalpels come out and the combined company creates value by cutting costs.And, boy, does it cut. The firm has developed a laserlike focus on the expense side with something called zero-based budgeting.Each year, costs for every item at its portfolio companies are reassessed. Everything is on the table as the budget is recalculated annually.Printers are gotten rid of, trash collection reduced and overhead slashed in what has been referred to as “brutal” cost-cutting.At the Tim Hortons chain, for example, the company was able to grow margins 6 percent by firing most senior executives and reducing capital expenditures by 75 percent.For every $1 on the menu at outlets of the parent company, Restaurant Brands, the company stands to reap a profit of 45 cents — a figure that is double the industry average.Acquisitions take the place of product development.At the companies that 3G controls, it puts into place young yet experienced managers who implement their cost-cutting agenda.Restaurant Brands is led by Daniel Schwartz, a 3G executive who at 35 is steeped in the company’s ways.The chief executive of Kraft Heinz, Bernardo Hees, also is a partner in 3G and was promoted from his job successfully running Burger King. The firm is known for a focus on talent and also on awarding lots of incentive compensation.The focus on margins is not pretty, though. When 3G bought Heinz it fired 11 of 12 top executives almost immediately, and about a quarter of the headquarters staff.The 3G cost-cutting machine is such a legend that its recent announcement that it bought Popeye’s Louisiana Fried Chicken resulted in Restaurant Brands’ stock price increasing more than 7 percent.The reason was that investors were in essence betting that the 3G magic could produce that value through cuts and possibly foreign expansion for the largely domestic Popeye’s.Restaurant Brands’ overhead is 1.3 percent of systemwide sales, compared with 2.8 percent for Popeye’s; that will no doubt be brought into line.The chief executive of Popeye’s, Cheryl A. Bachelder, has already announced that she will be leaving, no doubt to be replaced by a 3G Capital disciple.The company’s obsessive efforts to cut back on costs can almost make other private equity firms look like spendthrifts in comparison.The success of 3G has been so great that one has to wonder why others don’t simply copy it. After all, there is no complex secret formula in cutting printers and other costs.One way that 3G is different than other investment and private equity firms is its partnership with Warren E. Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway.Mr. Buffett backed the firm when it merged Heinz with Kraft, providing financing for a nice fat rate of interest on a preferred stock.The two have also joined forces to profit from the fast-food industry. 3G bought Burger King, then took the company public by merging it with an investment vehicle controlled by William A. Ackman’s Pershing Square Capital Management.The renamed Restaurant Brands then bought Tim Hortons with $3 billion of capital put in by Berkshire Hathaway.And Restaurant Brands is about to get even bigger with an agreement to buy Popeye’s and its 2,600 locations for $1.8 billion.But the larger question about 3G is whether it is possible to keep creating value by acquisition. At some point, you might think, the music stops playing.Were that to happen, it would become clear how much long-term value is actually being created, and how much of the gains are short-term lifts from acquisitions and cost cuts. Restaurant Brands, for example, has reduced costs but revenue has remained relatively flat. Last quarter, Kraft Heinz’s revenue fell 3.7 percent.In other words, with flat revenue, income has to come from somewhere, and you can only slash so much.It’s a model that private equity firms don’t follow. To be sure, they also cut costs, but private equity also prides itself on revenue expansion and innovation. And the reason is simple: If the merger and acquisition pipeline dries up, so does the growth.Indeed, Anheuser-Busch InBev is hurting now that it is too big to acquire other companies of significant scale. Its profits fell last quarter. The solution it offered: more cost-cutting.The 3G deal makers have their supporters, of course. Mr. Buffett, who reaps great benefits financing their deals, has praised the 3G founders. “Jorge Paulo and his associates could not be better partners,” Mr. Buffett has written.In similar ways, Pershing Square has profited greatly from its partnership with 3G and Mr. Ackman has praised its methods.These prominent investors will continue to do so, as long as the acquisition machine can continue.And the managers at 3G are certainly smart and have made many improvements to both companies.But one has to wonder if a firm can succeed simply by cutting. To be sure there will be some gains and value made from the cuts, but eventually part of running a business means actually building something.Like it or not, that will require spending on new products and the business itself, something 3G’s managers appear to hate above all else, as opposed to simply acquiring more companies.