https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/15/magazine/the-pleasure-of-a-chilled-soup-on-a-sweltering-day.html
The Pleasure of a Chilled Soup on a Sweltering Day - The New York Times
Soups,New York City,Recipes,Summer (Season),Cooking and Cookbooks
June 15, 2017
6439
Back when it used to snow in winter and bloom in spring, and when the dog days of summer came reliably in August and not weirdly in April or June, I used to drink ice-cold schav to keep from falling completely apart. In those days, we languished in our East Village or Hell’s Kitchen railroad apartments — the kind with floors that sloped and a tub in the kitchen from which you could reach a wet hand out of the morning shower to turn off the gas under the hissing pot of Café Bustelo. You’d throw your key down in a balled-up tube sock to friends below on the sidewalk — because the buzzer never worked — and you’d sit out on the fire escape at night to try to stay cool.In that kind of sweltering heat — which here in ruthless New York automatically came with the added affronts of suffocating humidity, truck grit, broken glass, screeching subway cars and the stench of some unexplained three-day stretch without garbage pickup — a cold beverage was hardly enough. You’re not just hot; you’re blunted. Stupid. Gummy. Cold beer, cold soda, cold water may all do their parts to keep you hydrated but do next to nothing for your compromised faculties, leaving you wide open and vulnerable to, say, surrendering upward of 40 bucks, in $5 increments, to the three-card-monte guys who used to run their scams off flattened cardboard boxes topping milk crates on 14th Street, before broken-windows policing was even a thing.I will swear to you that the ultrafocusing combination of salt and puckering tartness of sorrel in this ice-cold schav has spared me from some of the more sinister and costlier summer scams of the era. It was not I who meticulously examined and then bought that brand-new stereo receiver for $100 from a guy on the corner of Houston and Sixth, only to open the box up at home to find nothing but wet newspaper inside.Schav, from Russia to Poland to the East Village, is supposed to be eaten as a soup, with a spoon, hot or cold. But the sweltering heat of August being what it was, I chugged it straight out of the jar, standing in front of an oscillating electric fan and wrapped in a cold-soaked bedsheet, as a refreshing tonic. It’s made from the shockingly tart herb sorrel, which belongs to the buckwheat family along with rhubarb. I mention this to convey how stimulating and astringent it is in the mouth — just like raw rhubarb.The Key Food on Avenue A stocked it on one of the two shelves (not three aisles like now) devoted to “ethnic/exotic” foods, which held nothing more “international” than Goya canned beans, Manischewitz boxed matzo and Kikkoman soy sauce. There you could buy a jar of Gold’s schav — a murky, drab green curiosity that sat next to the even stranger and murkier gefilte fish and the borscht. Those soups, then and now, look like something from the Mütter Museum in Philadelphia, where medical anomalies like conjoined fetal twins sit in fluid. But that’s what was available. You could get a bowl of schav made fresh at Ratner’s on Delancey Street, where they kept half their overhead fluorescents turned off during the day, which made the restaurant feel cooler, though I never knew if this was from parsimony, ecological concern or shrugging neglect.But now that most of our apartments have level floors, separate rooms for bathing and stainless-steel appliances, you can make your own, following this recipe, and eat it as a more civilized soup, with a spoon, out of a bowl, wearing a more reasonable sundress than the cold-wet-bedsheet trick of long ago. I still think you want to keep as much of that tart vitality as you can take, and sand down just the roughest spots with a little fat and a little protein, leaving the edges, so to speak, as sharp as possible, because that’s what snaps you into focus. Sweating the sorrel in butter, adding a few cubes of cooked potato and then dressing the finished soup with chopped hard-boiled egg tames the intensity just enough and transforms the dish from a chuggable rescue remedy into a proper and elegant soup. Mincing the reserved raw stems, just as you would chives, and scattering them over the finished dish adds not just an attractive garnish but also lively pops of acidity in each spoonful.Now that we are as likely to be crushed by the heat in June as in August, and because we’re apparently no longer going to join the rest of the world in doing anything about it, this soup might at least keep you cool and alert through the long, punishing days ahead.Recipe: Ice-Cold Schav