https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/16/us/politics/trump-campaign-paul-manafort-ukraine-cash-payments-russia.html
Trump Campaign and Its Chief, Paul Manafort, Try to Move Past Ukraine Report - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Manafort  Paul J,Trump  Donald J,Ukraine,Russia,Lewandowski  Corey (1975- ),Russian Interference in 2016 US Elections and Ties to Trump Associates
Aug. 15, 2016
4195
The Trump campaign was on the defensive on Monday after a New York Times report revealed that its chairman, Paul Manafort, was designated to receive $12.7 million in undisclosed and potentially illegal cash payments from a pro-Russian political party in Ukraine.The revelation preceded a high-profile national security speech by Donald J. Trump on Monday afternoon in Ohio, and threatened to derail the Republican presidential nominee’s latest effort to avoid distractions and stick to policy as he tried to stop his poll numbers from sliding.In a statement, Mr. Manafort denied wrongdoing and said The Times was ignoring the facts to fulfill a political agenda against Mr. Trump. He denied ever receiving an “off-the-books cash payment” or having worked for the Ukrainian or Russian governments.“The suggestion that I accepted cash payments is unfounded, silly and nonsensical,” Mr. Manafort said. He said that any payments he received were for a broader political campaign team that included local and international staff, polling and research.The secret ledgers kept by a pro-Russian political group in Ukraine, the Party of Regions, contain 22 separate references of cash disbursements designated for Mr. Manafort between 2007 and 2012. The disbursements amount to $12.7 million, according to anticorruption officials there.Ukrainian officials have emphasized that the appearance of Mr. Manafort’s name in the so-called black ledgers does not mean he received the money.However, the possibility remains that some of those funds may have gone to his lobbying firm or to other companies in which he held an interest. On Monday, both Mr. Manafort and his lawyer, Richard A. Hibey of Washington, did not respond to emails asking how much the political operative or his firms were paid during the five-year period in question by his main client in Ukraine, former President Viktor F. Yanukovych, or the Party of Regions.In his statement, Mr. Manafort criticized the news media as covering the campaign unfairly, just as Mr. Trump had been doing of late.“The Times does fail to disclose the fact that the Clinton Foundation has taken (and may still take) payments in exchange for favors from Hillary Clinton while serving as secretary of state,” Mr. Manafort said, referring to Mr. Trump’s Democratic opponent. “This is not discussed despite the overwhelming evidence in emails that Hillary Clinton attempted to cover up.”Democrats seized on the situation on Monday, drawing a connection between Mr. Manafort’s ties to the region and Mr. Trump’s frequent praise of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. Mr. Trump has regularly lauded Mr. Putin’s leadership abilities, has suggested that as president he would foster friendlier relations with Russia and has called on Russia to use its espionage abilities to hack into Mrs. Clinton’s emails.“Given the pro-Putin policy stances adopted by Donald Trump and the recent Russian government hacking and disclosure of Democratic Party records, Donald Trump has a responsibility to disclose campaign chair Paul Manafort’s and all other campaign employees’ and advisers’ ties to Russian or pro-Kremlin entities, including whether any of Trump’s employees or advisers are currently representing and or being paid by them,” Robby Mook, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign manager, said in a statement.The Democratic National Committee, which has accused Russian hackers of breaching its computer systems, said the possibility that Mr. Manafort received undisclosed payments from pro-Kremlin groups was “troubling” in light of the attack that it had faced.“Donald Trump must disclose any and all ties, financial or otherwise, that he or his campaign aides have to the Russian government,” said Mark Paustenbach, the committee’s national press secretary.The new details about Mr. Manafort’s business in Ukraine also appeared to stir lingering tension between him and Corey Lewandowski, his predecessor, who was ousted from the campaign this year. Mr. Lewandowski, now a CNN analyst, posted the Times report on Twitter on Sunday evening without comment.Asked on the network about his intentions, Mr. Lewandowski said he was not passing judgment on Mr. Manafort and complained about the lack of attention given to Mrs. Clinton’s staff.“It was just a story,” Mr. Lewandowski said.