https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/11/magazine/he-was-on-blood-thinners-and-supplements-could-he-still-have-had-a-stroke.html
He Was on Blood Thinners and Supplements. Could He Still Have Had a Stroke? - The New York Times
Stroke,Turmeric (Spice),Emergency Medical Treatment,Drugs (Pharmaceuticals)
May 11, 2017
8814
The woman was surprised to find her 69-year-old partner still in bed after she got home from church. He was usually an early riser — up and dressed by 7:30 every morning, even after he retired, even after two strokes, even after a heart attack. He just needed a little more sleep, he mumbled when she tried to rouse him. But she was worried. He was slurring his words and his face didn’t look right — it seemed strangely lopsided.She checked his blood pressure. It was high. He never wanted to go to the hospital — but, she told him, he had to. She helped him get dressed and into the car. His face and mouth drooped on one side. And he had to lean on her when he walked. She drove him to the University of Connecticut John Dempsey Hospital emergency room.He hadn’t been himself since the night before, the patient told the physician assistant in the E.R. He was “woozy” and tired. He had a headache and felt off balance when he walked.He had a slew of medical problems, his partner told the young P.A. Indeed, his cardiologist, Dr. Christopher Pickett, frequently joked that he was “on the endangered-species list.” She knew this was the doctor’s way of telling her that she needed to watch her partner carefully — and she did just that. He took a few medicines for his high blood pressure and heart disease. He also had an irregular heartbeat, a condition called atrial fibrillation, which put him at risk for another stroke. He took a blood thinner, also known as an anticoagulant, for that.In addition to those drugs, he regularly used supplements that he purchased from a variety of online pharmacies: He was currently taking cinnamon and Coenzyme Q10. The medical newsletters that filled his email inbox said they were good for his heart and would give him more energy. And at his age, he felt as if he needed all the energy he could get.The patient had always been active, and he was still trim and muscular, the P.A. noted. When he arrived at the E.R. his blood pressure was high — 164/114 (normal is below 140/90) — and his heart was racing. But he had been given medicines to bring down his blood pressure and slow his heart, and by the time she examined him he was improving. Still, while his face looked symmetrical, his speech remained slurred. The E.R. doctor, the neurologist and the patient’s partner all worried that he was suffering another stroke.Patients with atrial fibrillation are at risk for strokes because the uncoordinated motions of the heart muscle, or fibrillations, allow some blood being pumped through the heart to pool and form tiny clots. When that blood is finally pumped out, these clots can become lodged in small arteries and block the flow of blood, starving the downstream tissue of essential oxygen. The doctors ordered a CT scan of his head to look for any sign of such an injury.Instead of seeing the expected darkened area of blood-starved tissue, the scan revealed a patch of bright white, about the size and shape of a robin’s egg, just over his left ear. The patient had bleeding in his brain. Because of the blood-thinning drug he took to prevent strokes, it would be hard for his blood to coagulate and stop the flow. The man was sent to the intensive-care unit for close monitoring. If the bleeding continued, he would need medicines to make his blood clot, or possibly even surgery.Dr. Ursula Bailey, the intern charged with this patient’s care in the I.C.U., met him that night. His exam was normal save for some slight slurring of his words. A second CT, done a few hours later, showed that the bleeding had stopped. And by the following morning, his blood pressure and heart rate were back to normal.Now that the patient was stable, the issue on Bailey’s mind was why he bled in the first place. Sure, he was on a very effective blood thinner, but he’d been taking that for years without bleeding. He hadn’t fallen and hit his head. And none of the tests suggested he had an infection or a weakness in the blood vessels in the brain that would make bleeding more likely.Later that morning, the patient’s partner brought in all his medications and supplements. But there was one that was not on the list from the E.R.: turmeric. He started taking it earlier that week, he told the doctor. It’s from India — it’s completely natural.Bailey, like most doctors, didn’t know much about supplements. And she didn’t know anything about turmeric, beyond the fact that it was a yellow spice sometimes used in curries. Could it have contributed in some way to his bleeding? It was his only new medication. She posed the question to her team on rounds. Stephen Rappaport, a young pharmacist who saw patients with the I.C.U. team, was immediately interested. He didn’t know much about turmeric either, but he would certainly look into it.As the team discussed other issues involved in this man’s care, Rappaport fired off an email to the University of Illinois at Chicago Drug Information Group, a subscription research service for pharmacists, asking about any effect turmeric might have on blood clotting. Their response came back a few hours later. Yes, turmeric is a blood thinner. Though the researchers had found no published reports of patients bleeding from taking turmeric, it could increase the risk, especially if paired with another anticoagulating drug. They concluded that patients should “avoid concomitant use.”In prescribing a medication like the blood thinner this patient was taking, doctors must weigh the benefit of reducing the blood’s ability to clot against the potential damage of unstoppable bleeding. For this patient, the math seemed straightforward. He’d already had a couple of strokes, and he was at high risk of having a third if nothing was done, so he was given the blood thinner. But this brain bleed made the doctors wonder if the math had now changed. The patient’s risk of having another stroke was quite high, but so was his risk of bleeding again — unless the turmeric had played a role. If that were the case, and it was a big if, then simply not taking the turmeric would be enough to balance the risk-benefit equation.Few published studies show how supplements act in the human body in controlled trials. Unlike drug makers, supplement makers are not required to test what their products actually do. Turmeric’s blood-thinning effect is not generally an issue when eaten, as it contains only a tiny amount of its anticoagulant ingredient, curcumin. A half-teaspoon of the turmeric on your spice shelf contains only 50 milligrams of curcumin. But the capsules of turmeric sold as a supplement are almost all curcumin. Each dose contains 1000-2000 mg. of the drug. Many sites on the internet that discuss turmeric mention this fact and suggest not combining it with medications or other supplements that have an anticoagulant effect, but this patient hadn’t seen the warning.The patient was discharged from the hospital after a few more days. His prescribed blood thinner was restarted a couple of weeks after the rest of his medications. And he was told to stay off turmeric. No one could say for certain whether he would bleed again from the one blood thinner, or whether the turmeric had been the cause.It has been two and a half years since this hospitalization, and the patient has had no more bleeds. He still occasionally orders supplements, but his partner keeps an eye out and tries to intercept them. He puts up with it good-naturedly. He told me, “I know she’s just looking out for me.”