https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/29/world/americas/rallying-global-support-obama-pledges-larger-us-role-in-peacekeeping-missions.html
Rallying Global Support, Obama Pledges Larger U.S. Role in Peacekeeping Missions - The New York Times
Obama  Barack,United Nations,China,United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations,United States,Xi Jinping,International Relations,General Assembly (UN)
Sept. 28, 2015
8748
UNITED NATIONS —  President Obama announced Monday that the United States would bolster its support for United Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide, as he rallied more than 50 countries to promise to expand their contributions, amounting to around 40,000 new soldiers and police officers.Leading a summit meeting on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly, Mr. Obama said the United States would provide more logistical support, including air- and sea-lift capacity; build airfields or base camps if urgently needed; and train peacekeepers to counter improvised explosive devices, which are a common danger and often prove fatal for peacekeepers deployed in countries like Mali.Just hours before the meeting, which was months in the making, President Xi Jinping of China sought to steal some of the thunder by announcing in his speech to the General Assembly that his country would build an 8,000-member peacekeeping standby force and contribute $1 billion over the next 10 years to a United Nations “peace and development fund.”Mr. Xi’s continuing efforts to show China ramping up its global influence are largely directed at his audience at home. Mr. Xi announced a debt relief package for the least developed countries on Saturday, and on Sunday, at a session focused on gender equality, said China would offer training to provide skills to 30,000 women from the developing world.China has increased its involvement in United Nations peacekeeping in recent years, including by sending troops to South Sudan and by insisting, for the first time in a peacekeeping mission, that the mandate is to protect not just civilians, but also critical infrastructure like oil fields in which China has a stake.The competing announcements aside, the United States and China have largely agreed on the establishment of peacekeeping missions and their mandates in recent years. Mr. Xi attended the summit meeting led by Mr. Obama on Monday afternoon and made some more pledges, like sending a helicopter squad for peacekeeping in Africa.Several countries like Rwanda and India that have traditionally contributed peacekeeping troops pledged to increase their numbers, and their leaders vowed publicly to investigate allegations of abuse in their ranks and seek accountability.Some European countries said they would once more put boots on the ground under the United Nations’ blue helmets; among them, Britain pledged engineers and other specialists for the mission in South Sudan.The United States is the single largest funder of United Nations peacekeeping, picking up nearly a fourth of the tab, but it is one of the smallest contributors of personnel. It has 82 troops, police officers and military experts on missions; by comparison, Bangladesh has sent more than 9,400.The announcements come at a time when United Nations peacekeeping is bigger and costlier than ever and increasingly under scrutiny, including for cases of sexual abuse of civilians whom the forces are sent to protect.This month Secretary General Ban Ki-moon proposed an overhaul of peacekeeping and goaded the Security Council, which sets the forces’ mandates, to do more to solve conflicts diplomatically. Mr. Obama’s announcement addressed part of that challenge. “U.N. peacekeeping cannot keep up with growing demands,” he said. “This is not something we do for others; this is something we do collectively because our collective security depends on it.”The nations involved in the summit meeting also expressed a commitment to modernizing peacekeeping. They said in a joint declaration released by the White House that contributions by member states “must be accompanied by reforms in how U.N. peacekeeping is organized and supported.”