https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/books/review/the-great-nadar-felix-tournachon-biography-adam-begley.html
You May Not Know His Name, but You’ve Seen His Pictures of Sarah Bernhardt - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Tournachon  Gaspard-Felix (Nadar) (1820-1910),Begley  Adam,The Great Nadar: The Man Behind the Camera  (Book)
July 17, 2017
4405
THE GREAT NADAR The Man Behind the Camera By Adam Begley Illustrated. 248 pp. Tim Duggan Books. $28.Félix Tournachon, known as Nadar, was one of the greatest portraitists in photographic history. The pictures he made of Parisian notables between 1854 and 1860 combine an almost sculptural force of composition and lighting with an acute psychological penetration unmatched in their day. He was forward-looking in other ways, too. Not only was he an early and insistent proponent of flying machines, he was also a celebrity-chaser, publicity hound and personal-brand advocate of a nearly 21st-century sort. At his peak, his studio and showroom on Boulevard des Capucines was topped by a giant reproduction of his signature in red glass tubing (made for him by Antoine Lumière, father of the cinema pioneers the Lumière brothers), which was lit up at night by gas. You didn’t see many things like that in 1861.It is thus entirely fitting that a biography should come out now, although it seems strange that it’s the very first in English, and that there have been only three in French. And Adam Begley’s sympathetic and judicious book is a slim affair, as biographies go, for all that it is crammed with character and incident. That is perhaps because Nadar’s life was a series of discrete phases, with an antic personality at their center, that do not add up to any sort of grand narrative nor entail much mystery or depth. There is considerable depth in those portraits of 1854-60, of course, but the mystery is how that six-year episode of creative genius stands isolated, an anomaly in a life nearly 90 years long.Gaspard-Félix Tournachon was born in Paris in 1820, the elder of two sons. His father’s publishing business went bust when he was 13, and the father died four years later. Félix, voluble and popular, with an unruly mop of bright red hair, received his nickname early — it stems from an untranslatable bit of wordplay — and he adopted it increasingly in adult life, receiving mail addressed to “Nadar” in his teens, making it his pen name a decade later, and eventually establishing it as his legal trademark and most valuable possession. After dropping out of medical studies Nadar signed up for the bohemian life — indeed, one of his pals was Henry Murger, author of “Scènes de la Vie de Bohème” — and tried his hand at writing, without much success.He had considerably better luck with caricature, an important medium in mid-19th-century Paris. He wasn’t as naturally gifted at drawing as some of his contemporaries (Daumier and Doré, for example), but he was definitely clever. Soon, Nadar’s caricatural enterprise came to display three characteristic themes: a particular interest in the physiognomies of the great and the good; an interest in monetizing his works through ingenious forms of packaging; and a willingness to put his friends to work — writing elaborate captions for his drawings, for example — while taking credit, Tom Sawyer style. The culmination of this part of his career came in the form of a plan for an elaborate set of tableaux, the “Panthéon-Nadar,” in which all the notables of France were to parade, comically. The set was sold by subscription, although only the first sheet (of writers) was produced, and while a critical success it was a financial failure, selling a mere 136 copies.Meanwhile, Nadar had set up his hapless younger brother, Adrien, as a photographer, apprenticing him to Gustave Le Grey. The infant medium had taken Paris by storm, the number of professional photographers in the city rising from 13 in 1848 to over 350 two decades later. No sooner had Adrien established a studio than Félix began to realize his own interest in the medium, but Adrien spurned Félix’s collaboration after they had taken a number of pictures that are difficult to attribute precisely to either. To make matters worse, Adrien started signing his prints “Nadar jne” (“jne” for “jeune,” the younger), which eventually resulted in a bitter lawsuit between the brothers. (The struggle over ownership of his name would be repeated some 40 years later, this time with Félix’s own son, who styled himself “Paul Nadar” against Félix’s wishes.) The feud seems to have had the effect of concentrating Nadar’s mind, impelling him toward his period of great productivity and accomplishment.His choice of subjects is no mystery, and neither is Nadar’s ability to coax and flatter and badger them into submitting their inner beings to the lens. As he wrote in his deepest statement of purpose — in an appeal in the course of the lawsuit, enumerating matters that must be innate to the photographer: “What is even less likely to be learned is the moral intelligence of your subject — the rapid tact that puts you in communion with your model.” What remains inexplicable is how he summoned the ability to compose each portrait so individually, to make each of them so lapidary and definitive: the deeply shadowed Baudelaire, the looming young Gustave Doré, the ravaged Marceline Desbordes-Valmore, Gérard de Nerval at the end of his powers, the glamorous Sarah Bernhardt at the very beginning of hers.Although Nadar’s photographic career was to continue for more than three decades after 1860, he seldom took another photograph of the caliber of those he made in the six previous years. There’s a stunning deathbed picture of Victor Hugo in 1885; a deeply moving portrait of his wife, Ernestine, in 1890, after she had suffered a stroke (and which Roland Barthes called “one of the loveliest photographs in the world”); and his interview with the centenarian scientist Eugène Chevreul, in 1886, that was illustrated with sequential photos of the two of them talking, suggesting a film. Otherwise his studio cranked out hundreds of standard portraits, interchangeable with those issued by the enterprises of Carjat, Disdéri or any of the other hundreds of Parisian photographers, gifted or not, who were simply making rote product to meet their overhead.He also photographed the Paris catacombs, making exposures with the aid of feeble and cumbersome Bunsen batteries, the only way to take pictures in darkness before the invention of flash powder. And he pioneered aerial photography, a pursuit that went in hand with his obsession with flight. He had witnessed a balloon ascension as a child, taken his first trip aloft at 37, and then chartered a balloon and installed a darkroom and laboratory in its basket, somehow solving the problem of the balloon’s escaping gas neutralizing the silver iodide in the developer. He went on to pioneer airmail too, during the siege of Paris in 1870, and miraculously had the problem of return mail — since balloons coming back would have been more vulnerable to the Prussian troops below — solved for him by an anonymous stranger, who proposed microphotographing the letters and having the film sent by carrier pigeon. He also launched the preposterously large balloon Le Géant, with calamitous results, and was heavily invested in a doomed early version of a helicopter.And of course he had himself photographed as an aeronaut — in a basket suspended from the ceiling of his studio. He took or engineered more self-portraits than any 19th-century photographer with the possible exception of the Countess de Castiglione. The cover image shows the series he took from 12 angles all around his head — you can see it animated online. He would have been very much at home in our day.