http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/31/world/asia/in-afghan-presidential-campaign-north-is-all-important.html
In Afghan Presidential Campaign, North Is All-Important - The New York Times
Elections,Voting and Voters,Afghanistan,Ghani  Ashraf,Dostum  Abdul Rashid,Abdullah  Abdullah,Rassoul  Zalmay
March 30, 2014
1798
KUNDUZ, Afghanistan —  When the presidential candidate Ashraf Ghani took the stage this month before more than 15,000 people in the northern province of Kunduz, his speech about fighting corruption and the need for unity and security was met with polite applause.Then his running mate, the warlord Abdul Rashid Dostum, an ethnic Uzbek, took the stage. The crowd erupted, with his supporters pressing to the edge of a 10-foot-deep trench dug to keep them from rushing the dais.In effect, Mr. Ghani, a multilingual technocrat with a doctorate from Columbia University who is considered a front-runner, was relegated to being the warm-up act for his vice-presidential candidate.Despite being seen as a controversial figure, Mr. Dostum is unrivaled in his appeal to Afghanistan’s Uzbek population, which lives almost entirely in the north. That Mr. Ghani has featured Mr. Dostum so prominently on his ticket is a testament to how important the north is in the presidential vote set for Saturday.Many of the major candidates have focused on this region in recent weeks, heavily canvassing a swath of provinces that stretches roughly the distance from Boston to Washington.The appeal is clear: In 2009, more voters turned out in the north than in any other region. Traveling is safer here than in other parts of the country, making it easier for voters to get to the polls. And for the winning candidate, good relations with northern power brokers will be crucial to forming a government with broad support.“That’s where the vast majority of the voters live,” said Jawid Kohistani, a political analyst based in Kabul, the capital. “Everyone is trying to secure votes in the north.”For Abdullah Abdullah, another front-runner and the closest rival to President Hamid Karzai in the 2009 election, it is essentially home. Mr. Abdullah is half Tajik and half Pashtun, but politically he is most closely identified with the main Tajik political party in the north. Given that, and his bona fides as a veteran of the northern resistance to the Soviet occupation, he has a deep well of support in the region.Another main candidate, Zalmay Rassoul, has been a longtime technocrat in Mr. Karzai’s cabinet. Lacking a natural political base, he is counting on help from his vice-presidential choice: Ahmad Zia Massoud, the brother of the revered northern resistance fighter Ahmed Shah Massoud.Mr. Ghani, meanwhile, has Mr. Dostum, who maintains a private militia and has been accused by human rights groups of ordering mass killings. Before naming him his first vice president, Mr. Ghani called him a “known killer.”While Mr. Dostum’s appeal is not broad in the way that Mr. Abdullah’s is, his prominence among Afghanistan’s Uzbeks and ethnic Turkmen, believed to account for more than 10 percent of the country’s population, is unrivaled. That gives Mr. Ghani a good shot at finding a northern base that does not overlap much with Mr. Abdullah’s.Recently, Mr. Ghani defended his choosing Mr. Dostum as his running mate as part of a potential national reconciliation process.“A lasting peace cannot be produced without people who have been engaged in conflict,” he said in an interview at his home in western Kabul. “How are we going to arrive at peace without engaging the parties that fought against each other?”He added: “I have no history of conflict or corruption. That take makes me a mediator, a catalyst.”Faction and ethnicity have long been divisive in Afghanistan — so much so that the country has not held a census in decades, for fear that shifting demographics could disrupt the balance of power.According to the last census in 1979, Pashtuns are the largest group, followed by Tajiks, Hazaras and Uzbeks. The south and east are almost entirely Pashtun, the ethnicity that has largely ruled Afghanistan for hundreds of years. The north is home to a wide array of ethnicities, including Tajiks, Uzbeks and at least some Hazaras, who are more concentrated in the center of the country.As an exercise in representation, Afghan presidential elections have been relatively progressive: All of the candidates have balanced their tickets by drawing from the country’s major ethnic populations.In 2009, Mr. Karzai almost exclusively won the southern and eastern Pashtun votes. Mr. Abdullah, his closest competitor, earned his votes largely in the north.Mr. Abdullah’s northern dominance was on full display during a recent rally in Mazar-i-Sharif, the wealthiest city in the region. More than 40,000 supporters waited hours in the sun without food or water to listen to him.“The entire population of the north knows him very well,” said Syed Khan Sekandari, who was at the rally. “He was with the country during jihad, and he was with us during the Taliban fight, too.”In an interview after the rally, Mr. Abdullah said, “Jihad is not a liability in this country.” (In Afghanistan, references to jihad, or holy war, are widely understood to mean the fight against Soviet occupiers.) “As for our resistance to the Taliban, well, the whole world is now part of that resistance.”In his own bid for votes in the north, Mr. Rassoul recently visited the Panjshir Valley — the nerve center of the northern resistance to the Soviets and the Taliban, and the home of Ahmed Shah Massoud, who was assassinated by the Taliban two days before the Sept. 11 attacks.Mr. Rassoul told a gathering of several thousand people that he was honored to be standing before them in the birthplace of a national hero. He recalled how once, years earlier, he had stayed up all night with Mr. Massoud, sharing ideas about the future of Afghanistan.“In the last few days, I have traveled to many of the provinces up north addressing my future strategies,” Mr. Rassoul said. “Our team is supported by thousands of people in Mazar-i-Sharif and Baghlan.”Samarudin, 32 — who, like many Afghans, goes by a single name — said he believed that as vice president, Ahmad Zia Massoud would help bring positive change.“I personally know nothing about Rassoul, but Ahmad Zia’s presence made me interested in supporting his team,” Samarudin said.Others applauded the presence of their hero’s brother, but stopped short of offering support.Given the country’s Pashtun plurality, some fear that Mr. Abdullah would have a hard time in a runoff vote, which is considered very likely. The common wisdom among Afghans is that Pashtuns, from whom the Taliban are almost exclusively drawn, would not accept a presidential candidate seen as a Tajik.Mr. Ghani could also end up with a demographic problem: There is no Tajik on his presidential ticket, leading some to fear that a win for him could destabilize the country. Mr. Dostum, while popular with his Uzbek ethnic group, is hardly a beloved figure among Tajiks.For now, Mr. Ghani insists that he is running a national unity ticket, and has promised inclusion in his administration if he wins.While the rally in Kunduz was largely a snapshot of Mr. Dostum’s Uzbek and Turkmen support, Pashtun leaders were also present to support Mr. Ghani.But few were thinking of Mr. Ghani by the time the rally ended. Mr. Dostum had whipped the crowd into a frenzy.“Long live Dostum! Long live Dostum!” young men chanted as they lined the deep security ditch around the dais.As a mob chased Mr. Dostum’s vehicle down the hill, one older man screamed: “Long live myself! Long live myself! I just kissed the hand of General Dostum!”