https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/21/world/europe/angela-merkel-faces-criticism-over-agreement-with-turkey.html
Angela Merkel’s Trust in Turkey and Greece on Migrants Comes With Risks - The New York Times
Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Germany,Turkey,Greece,Merkel  Angela,Refugees and Displaced Persons,Green Party (Germany),European Union,North Atlantic Treaty Organization,Erdogan  Recep Tayyip
March 20, 2016
5456
BERLIN —  Chancellor Angela Merkel, alternately lauded for courage and reviled for recklessness in admitting more than one million migrants into Germany, finally has what she wanted: a European Union accord with Turkey to reduce and manage the influx.But even before the ink had dried on the deal reached Friday, Ms. Merkel faced sharp criticism from human rights groups for compromising on European values that she herself had championed regarding the protection of refugees, as well as from others who questioned a partnership with Turkey.The European Union has embraced a nation whose president, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has veered from democracy, muffling the news media and other freedoms. He has pursued his own agenda against opponents of the Assad government in Syria’s civil war, reviving a military campaign against Kurd militants while facing terrorist bombings in Ankara and Istanbul.“Does anybody seriously think that a country which hunts down and mistreats its own citizens can offer security to people in flight?” asked Cem Ozdemir, the leader of the opposition Greens and one of an estimated three million people of Turkish descent in Germany.Another Greens leader, Anton Hofreiter, told The Rheinische Post, “Angela Merkel has achieved a European solution, but abandoned her own humane stance.”While others were less categorical in their criticism, the compromises entailed in the accord no doubt underscored that the refugee crisis has eluded easy solutions. But it was made necessary by Europe’s inability to secure its own borders and put in place a timely and workable plan to process and redistribute refugees.Short of that, Ms. Merkel argued, the deal with Turkey was all that stood between Europe and a repeat of the dangerous chaos that ensued last year when hundreds of thousands of migrants and refugees set off on rafts to cross the Aegean to Greece.The deal was also needed to shield European leaders from the political backlash in a bloc wary of migration. Even Ms. Merkel’s own political standing is being challenged by a shift among voters toward the far right.In essence, Europe will pay Turkey up to 6 billion euros, or nearly $6.8 billion, through 2018 to keep at least 2.7 million Syrian refugees in decent conditions and prevent their passage to a continent where Ms. Merkel and other leaders are under populist pressure to keep out more foreigners.Greece will get money and up to 4,000 European officials, judges and interpreters to help process any migrants who do still reach its shores and the approximately 40,000 already trapped there.The smugglers who have made billions shipping desperate migrants across the Aegean to Greece and on to Northern Europe will see their business destroyed because everyone reaching Greece will be turned back to Turkey, Ms. Merkel stressed three times as she presented the pact on Friday in Brussels.“Great plan,” said Stefan Ulrich of the liberal daily Süddeutsche Zeitung. “Just unfortunately a bit too reliant on good will on all sides.”But even as she hailed the deal, Ms. Merkel was cautious about its prospects. “Tremendous logistical challenges lie ahead,” she acknowledged on Friday.“I am under no illusions that what we decided today will also bring further setbacks,” she said. “But I think we have found an agreement that contains an aspect of irreversibility.”“Above all, it was very important to me that everything today was agreed together,” she continued, referring to the 28 European Union member states.With Friday’s agreement, Ms. Merkel is also safeguarding the billions already poured into keeping Greece in the euro currency, and shoring up NATO on its southeastern flank, adjacent to Middle East war zones. The alliance, including its often quarreling members Greece and Turkey, is now involved in patrolling the Aegean to prevent illegal migration.At home, Ms. Merkel has seen a far-right party ride the refugee crisis to spring from obscurity last summer to double-digit percentages in three state elections a week ago. She has also come under heavy fire in her own conservative bloc for refusing to impose a limit on sheltering migrants.The sharp fall in arrivals in Germany that has resulted from Austria’s and Balkan nations’ shutting their borders has benefited Ms. Merkel, whose poll standings are rising for the first time since December. If she now also controls the refugee influx her way, she is likely to regain further support.Tanja Börzel, a professor of politics and social sciences and integration expert at the Free University in Berlin, saw what she called good and bad news in Friday’s outcome.“I was very surprised,” she said by telephone, “that Turkey has committed to this for relatively little in exchange.”Professor Börzel pointed to Turkey’s succeeding in opening just one new policy channel for talks on eventual European Union membership and facing stiff conditions for the visa-free travel it seeks for Turks from late June.In addition, she said, Europe insisted that it would dispense the €3 billion, or about $3.4 billion, it initially promised Turkey in aid before giving more.“The European Union did not yield,” Professor Börzel said, seeing a gap between “what Turkey wanted and what it got.”The “bad news,” she added, is that Europe still depends heavily on Turkey and Greece to manage their share, despite broken past promises to do just that.The United Nations’ refugee agency, which has been pouring new staff and assistance into Greece, stopped just short of rejecting the deal and stressed that every refugee still must get an individual hearing.“Ultimately, the response must be about addressing the compelling needs of individuals fleeing war and persecution,” the agency said in a statement. “Refugees need protection, not rejection.”The International Rescue Committee, a nongovernmental group that recently arranged a meeting between Ms. Merkel and the actor George Clooney and his wife, Amal, a human rights lawyer, was more blunt. Instead of shutting down smuggling, the group warned, “the E.U.’s deal with Turkey will lead to more indignity, more disorder, more illegal journeys and more lives lost.”The newsweekly Der Spiegel, never slow to cast the chancellor in a critical light, noted that “on paper, she has (with some minus points) the deal she sought. But she now bears the responsibility that it works.”Ms. Merkel, who at 61 has been in power since 2005, brings not just her political experience but also the process-driven approach of a trained scientist to the task of governing. On Friday, she peppered her presentation with talk of summaries, phases and mechanisms, and purposefully looked on the bright side.“Why should I paint horror scenarios?” she asked a questioning journalist. “Let’s first of all begin with the process. It lies in our hands whether we undertake the visa liberalization” that Turkey seeks, and when and how to advance talks on European Union membership.Professor Börzel was also philosophical. Ms. Merkel’s plan assumes, she noted, that when the Syrian refugees find out that they cannot go to Germany, they will accept this and wait in Turkey. At least over the weekend, that indeed appeared to be the case.“There are a number of assumptions that we will see in the next weeks and months if they are confirmed,” Professor Börzel said. “It gives Europe and Ms. Merkel some time. And if it doesn’t work, we will all have to think again.”