http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/07/fashion/anthony-vaccarello-yves-saint-laurent.html
Who is Anthony Vaccarello, the New Designer of Yves Saint Laurent? - The New York Times
Fashion and Apparel,Yves Saint Laurent,Vaccarello  Anthony,Slimane  Hedi
April 4, 2016
9362
On Monday, Anthony Vaccarello was announced as the new creative director of Yves Saint Laurent, assuming the design position vacated by Hedi Slimane. For those in the fashion industry, where rumors of Mr. Vaccarello’s appointment have been front-row chatter for months, the news was no surprise; to those outside the industry slipstream, a little more explanation may be helpful.The designers who have stewarded Yves Saint Laurent since its founder and namesake stepped down from couture in 2002 (and ready-to-wear before that) are now well known: Besides Mr. Slimane, they include Tom Ford, Alber Elbaz (late of Lanvin) and Stefano Pilati. Here is a primer on Mr. Vaccarello in advance of his first collection in October.Mr. Vaccarello, 36, was born in Brussels to Italian parents. He studied at La Cambre, the Brussels design school also attended by Cédric Charlier and the Paco Rabanne creative director Julien Dossena.In 2006, he presented his graduate collection at the Hyères Festival in Côte d’Azur, a fashion and photography fair known for spotlighting emerging designers, where it won a Grand Prix. He went on to work for Karl Lagerfeld at Fendi until he struck out on his own with his Anthony Vaccarello label, presenting his first collection in 2009.Mr. Vaccarello has a taste for leggy, high-slit sex appeal and collections tailor-made for the impossibly toned and trim (he “a designer who demands clavicle perfection of his clients,” Eric Wilson wrote in The New York Times in 2013), earning him fans among the model classes. Anja Rubik, the Polish model who is a close friend of Mr. Vaccarello’s and wore a gown of his design sliced open as high as her hipbone to the Met Gala in 2012, has been a kind of unofficial mascot; similarly proportioned Amazons like Karlie Kloss and Joan Smalls have also worn his designs.That, along with the support of high-profile editors like Emmanuelle Alt of Paris Vogue, helped bring Mr. Vaccarello acclaim early and often. He won the Andam, the leading French fashion prize, in 2011. In 2013, Donatella Versace invited him to be one of the guest designers of Versace’s rock ’n’ roll sister collection, Versus Versace; in 2015, he was named its creative head.Yves Saint Laurent is to be his single-minded pursuit. Mr. Vaccarello has left Versus Versace as of this week, with Ms. Versace’s blessing, and Yves Saint Laurent confirmed that he will pause his own label when he begins his tenure at the house.The Anthony Vaccarello line, which is stocked at stores including Colette in Paris, Kirna Zabête in New York and Net-a-Porter worldwide, had become a growing draw during Paris Fashion Week, with Noomi Rapace, Lou Doillon, Lucky Blue Smith and Kanye West sitting front row.