https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/14/world/asia/samsung-jay-lee-jae-yong.html
Samsung Heir Again Faces Arrest in South Korea Bribery Scandal - The New York Times
Lee Jae-yong (1968- ),Park Geun-hye,South Korea,Bribery and Kickbacks,Politics and Government,Corruption (Institutional)
Feb. 14, 2017
5136
SEOUL, South Korea — The special prosecutor investigating the corruption scandal that led to the impeachment of President Park Geun-hye of South Korea said on Tuesday that he would try again to arrest the de facto leader of Samsung, one of the world’s largest technology companies, on bribery charges.A court in Seoul blocked investigators from arresting the Samsung leader, Lee Jae-yong, last month, saying that there was not enough evidence that he exchanged bribes for political favors from Ms. Park.Mr. Lee is the vice chairman of Samsung. He has been running the company since his father, Lee Kun-hee, the corporate chairman, was incapacitated in 2014.The decision blocking the arrest was a blow to the special prosecutor, Park Young-soo, who has tried to build a bribery case against the younger Mr. Lee and Ms. Park. His team has been trying since to strengthen its case, and Mr. Park’s office said on Tuesday that it had again asked a court in Seoul to issue an arrest warrant for Mr. Lee.Unless significant new evidence has emerged, it is highly unusual for a prosecutor to apply for an arrest warrant for a criminal suspect for a second time. Any attempt to arrest a leader of the powerful family-controlled conglomerates known as chaebol draws attention in South Korea, where people have grown weary of corrupt ties between the tycoons and government.Samsung is by far the largest company among the chaebol, and for decades it has symbolized both power and wealth in South Korea.The court said it would hold a hearing on Thursday to decide whether Mr. Lee should be arrested. There was no immediate reaction from Samsung on Tuesday.The investigation of Mr. Lee, a third-generation scion of Samsung, has repercussions beyond the conglomerate. Its main company, Samsung Electronics, accounts for 20 percent of the country’s total exports. Many Koreans fear that Mr. Lee’s arrest would hurt the national economy by depriving South Korea’s largest conglomerate of a crucial decision maker.But anticorruption campaigners said Mr. Lee’s case was a test of whether the country was ready to crack down on the white-collar crimes of the chaebol and their collusive ties with government.