https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/14/world/asia/an-afghan-mothers-heartache-three-sons-dead-in-a-day.html
An Afghan Mother’s Heartache: Three Sons Dead in a Day - The New York Times
Afghanistan,Taliban,Afghan National Security Forces,Deaths (Fatalities),Kandahar (Afghanistan),Kabul (Afghanistan)
Feb. 14, 2017
2400
KABUL, Afghanistan — For years, Shaima has toiled to make a home for her family in a congested district of Kabul, down a narrow alley in the shadow of a mountain.The ramshackle house she rents is filled with heirlooms, mementos of a home that was once filled with children, a husband, a thriving family.But for Shaima the objects are a daily reminder of the losses eating away at her: the clock ticking on a wall painted lime green recently in anticipation of a wedding that will never happen; the small metal cups for holy water for a future pilgrimage to Mecca; the simple spatula kept as a mournful souvenir and the many photographs, framed and unframed, of her sons.“I washed this, and put it away,” she says, pulling the spatula from the cupboard. “I won’t lose this for a hundred years, because Amanullah’s hands touched this.”Mohammed Amanullah is one of three sons, all police officers, whom Shaima lost to war on the same day last month, when Taliban militants attacked their outpost in the southern province of Kandahar.Men are dying in record numbers in Afghanistan, in a 15-year war that both sides have said cannot be won on the battlefield.Often, they are men who have exhausted every other opportunity for an honest living, before signing up for a gun and $200 a month. When they die, they — or what remains of them — eventually return home to children and families.And to mothers like Shaima.Shaima’s husband was paralyzed for the last decades of his life from disease. So she raised nine children, all but two of them sons, on her own. Shaima, whose husband died in 2013, has endured a life of difficulty and poverty, working hard to ensure that her children grew up into good people. She worried that the boys might become thieves or drug addicts, like so many other young men on the streets of cities across Afghanistan.Then, she lost three of them on one day. Just like that.Mohammed Zahir, who was engaged to be married soon, and Mohammed Jawed are the other two sons who died in the Taliban attack — their names added to the long roll of Afghan security force members who perish year after year.On a recent snowy morning before the funeral for her sons, Shaima appeared exhausted, her eyes sunken in deep dark circles. She was wearing an immaculate white shawl, under which she had tightly wrapped her head with a bandanna — to ease the chronic headaches that keep her from sleeping peacefully. She had no more tears left to shed. And after days of wailing, her voice was coarse.But she held herself up straight; she is a proud woman, proud to have raised a dignified family in the face of such hardship.The three brothers, ages 18, 20, and 28, were buried next to each other, up the mountain near their home. The night they were buried, there was a heavy snowfall. By early morning, pristine snow blanketed the cemetery. There were no foot marks, human or animal. The three graves had become part of the landscape.When security men like the three brothers die, often in large numbers, most of their deaths are denied at first by the government. Later, they become part of a tally, a soulless, imprecise number, often rounded off as if those in between did not have stories of their own.In recent years, the United States-led coalition fighting the Taliban has been drawn down to a small mission. As the Afghans have taken charge of the war, the tally of deaths has been growing so fast that neither NATO nor the Afghan government willingly discloses it.For just 11 months of 2016, 6,785 Afghan forces were killed, according to the United States Special Inspector General for Reconstruction in Afghanistan. (Other sources say the number is much higher.) That is three times the United States toll for the entire 15-year war. Another 11,777 men were wounded.That is only one side of the war.No one knows how many Taliban died in the same period. But many estimate it is more than the number of Afghan forces. The rebels lack the ability to evacuate and care for those wounded on the battlefield and face deadly air power from United States and Afghan forces.On the Taliban side, there are also countless mothers with stories of loss.One mother in Sangin district, in the southern province of Helmand, lost three sons fighting for the Taliban in a period of eight months. Mohammed Ibrahim was 30, and had a son and daughter. Mohammed Ismail, 26, had one daughter. And Mohammed Ishaq was 21.The mother, herself a widow, is now left with the two widows of her children, three grandchildren and one remaining teenage son.“Their mother is completely lost now,” said Haji Naqibullah, a nephew of the woman’s husband. “Even a heart of rock would have melted.”There is no phone coverage in Sangin, except for one small phone booth in the government-controlled half of the bazaar. We reached Mr. Naqibullah with the help of the shopkeeper manning the booth. A civilian, Mr. Naqibullah crossed the battle line to speak to us by telephone about the woman’s ordeal.In keeping with the Pashtun customs of rural areas of Afghanistan, which fiercely guards the privacy of women, he was reluctant to give the name of the mother. He said she was in poor health and unable to make the 20-minute journey from Malmoon, their village and a Taliban stronghold, to the phone booth.His account of the death of her sons was later confirmed by tribal elders from Malmoon who had fled an upsurge in fighting.Mr. Naqibullah said the woman’s three sons had gone away from the village for basic religious education. When they returned home to Malmoon, they had little option but to pick up guns for the militants who controlled the village.“You know that in villages, especially in Taliban-controlled areas, there’s nothing else for the young than picking up weapons.”He said Taliban units in the south are often so localized that when one fighter dies, the commander visits the family to pay condolences. He brings a sheep to sacrifice. And then, he asks if another brother could take up his weapons and his place.“This way they continue replacing father with brothers and uncles,” he said. “Until they are finished.”Days after Mr. Naqibullah spoke to us for a second time, fighting erupted again in the Sangin bazaar. The Taliban tunneled under some of the remaining army posts and set off explosives. Ten to more than 20 soldiers were killed, many of the bodies remaining in the wreckage for days.And the phone in the bazaar went silent.In Kabul, Shaima worked many jobs over the years to care for her nine children and her husband. She cleaned apartments of government officials and washed laundry for the well-off in Kabul’s upscale neighborhoods. During the harvest season, she left home before dawn, one of her children trailing behind and tugging at her burqa. On the outskirts of the city, men shoveled dirt and she crouched for hours to pick potatoes and onions.“I would reap wheat for you like no man could,” she recalls. “I would take the sickle and just reap,” she said.As her final job, Shaima worked for the Afghan government’s ministry of telecommunications, sweeping the offices of its 18-story headquarters. Two years ago, after 10 years and six months of service, she retired at age 73. She could afford to rest, she thought. Her two daughters were married off and her seven sons had not become thieves or addicts.When Shaima retired, the sons looked for every job opportunity possible.Zahir spent years as a laborer in Iran. Amanullah had worked as an apprentice for a mechanic since he was 7. Jawed, in his early teens, sold ice cream from a little handcart that blared a simple tune — tuu lu lu, tuu lu lu — as it made its way through alleys, and then switched to roasting sunflower seeds on the side of the road.But one after another, they found their way to the Afghan security forces. As the war escalated, Shaima had six sons serving in the farthest corners of the country — three as policemen in Kandahar’s Maiwand district, two in the besieged city of Farah in the west and one as an army commando in Logar province just south of Kabul. A seventh son, Mohammed Asef, has been in Iran for about a decade, working as a laborer.Then, about two weeks ago, came the call. One of the cousins was notified first.A day after news reached Kabul of the death of her three sons, Farhad, the army commando, made the dangerous bus journey to Kandahar to pick up the bodies. Relatives who got word started flocking to the house. Shaima had not been told of the news, but as cousins whom she hadn’t seen for years began arriving, she sensed something was wrong.So she started wailing. But she did not know what had happened, to which of her six sons. So she wailed for each one of them, naming one after another, until her elderly brother sat next to her and broke the news.“We will build your sons three new homes — pray for them,” the brother, Mohammed Yasin, told her.Shaima’s two sons in Farah, after they received news of the deaths, could not get home in time. They had no money for bus tickets and their commander said he could not give them the approximately $30 they would need.Family members in Kabul went to the bus station and paid for the tickets, and then phoned Farah so the brothers could get on board. But it was too late.“I didn’t get to see the bodies of my brothers before they were buried,” said Humayoon, who arrived from Farah the day after the burial. “We took our lives in the palms of our hands to defend our commanders, in situations where bullets were landing all around us. And they couldn’t give us 900 afghanis for a ticket so I could see my martyred brothers.”Humayoon and his brother Aref are planning to return to the battlefield in Farah when their leave is over. The city remains surrounded, and Afghan forces have suffered large casualties there. Aref recounted one dark night on which they buried 12 colleagues, digging graves by the headlights of their police Ford Rangers.When asked about her reaction to the remaining sons returning to the battlefield, Shaima sighed. Then she said: “If they stay here, they will either become thieves or addicts. What else is there to do?”