https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/23/world/europe/germany-refugees.html
A German Finds No Easy Answers as Refugee Influx Hits Home - The New York Times
Germany,Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Refugees and Displaced Persons
March 22, 2016
5587
HAMBURG, Germany — With refreshing frankness, a reporter for Der Spiegel has turned the spotlight on himself this week, chronicling his reactions since the authorities announced plans in August to settle 700 refugees in his quiet, family-friendly community in northern Hamburg.His conflicting emotions reflect the searing debate that has engulfed Germany since hundreds of thousands of migrants arrived last summer.They also cast a light on the difficulty, even in a wealthy country where democracy and rule of law seem entrenched, of reaching a compromise when absorbing a flood of strangers.At first, the journalist, Maik Grossekathöfer, thought, “Good idea.” His own mother and mother-in-law had been refugees from the East after World War II. Besides, his neighborhood of white professionals and their children could use a bit of diversity.He had little sympathy for neighbors who wept at the prospect of living alongside refugees, or planned to sell their homes and move before housing prices fell.But then the bulldozers arrived to flatten the greenhouses where the refugee housing — container-like units two or three stories high — would go.Troubled by the din, Mr. Grossekathöfer, who had worked in Iraq, Iran and Afghanistan, said he was unable to shake “dark thoughts.” At that time, thousands of refugees were arriving daily at the Munich train station, greeted with tea and toys by well-wishers.“The more gripping their speeches about their willingness to help, the more furious I became,” Mr. Grossekathöfer, 44, wrote in this week’s Der Spiegel.It is one thing, he wrote, to deliver old clothes to City Hall before returning to a stylish home far from any refugee shelter, and then “put one’s feet up and consider oneself a good person.”It was quite another “to live right next door to 700 refugees.”Why, he asked, is it so hard for the do-gooders to understand that this is an unsettling challenge? Why is neither side listening to the other?Then came New Year’s Eve in Cologne, and the reports of sexual assaults on hundreds of young women in the city, as well as in Hamburg and Stuttgart.His neighbors in his self-contained community of about 800 people blamed recent migrants and charged that the news media chose not to report it. For Mr. Grossekathöfer, such claims were “nonsense,” so he shifted gears once more, defending the media and the refugees.Now, he said, he just lives with mood swings.“It could be,” he said in an interview, “that everything will be super with the refugees. We’ll play soccer and have street parties.”But “it could also be that the police are visiting every third day,” he said. “And this possibility preoccupies people who live nearby.”The not-in-my-backyard feeling is augmented by another worry, he said. His neighbors, who thought they would have a say in the matter, “feel as if they are being dealt with from on high.”Such alienation is more often voiced by Germans supporting a new far-right party, Alternative for Germany, that has rapidly gained support.Hamburg, Mr. Grossekathöfer said, had rejected a compromise to accommodate 125 refugees and another 125 poorer Germans. Residents sued, and a court recently halted construction in what was the first legal challenge of a federal move last fall to ease regulations so refugee housing could be built quickly.The respite may prove temporary. Marcel Schweitzer, a social affairs spokesman for Hamburg, said the city had to appeal, because it needed the refugee housing. Reducing the number of refugees at the planned shelter near Mr. Grosskathöfer’s home by 500 means that the authorities must find an equivalent number of places elsewhere.Hamburg, with some 1.7 million inhabitants, needs to get 16,000 refugees out of temporary shelters like sports halls, Mr. Schweitzer added, while also preparing for a new influx, the city’s share of however many — one million? two million? — might arrive in Germany this year.The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, may hope that Europe and Turkey can now curb the flow of refugees. But down on the ground, the complex quest for compromise goes on. Mr. Grossekathöfer, a 17-year Spiegel veteran, says he feels “totally torn.”