http://www.nytimes.com/1979/10/27/archives/coup-brought-park-chung-hee-to-power-in-1961.html
Coup Brought Park Chunfi Hee to Power in 1961 - The New York Times
SOUTH KOREA,PARK CHUNG HEE
Oct. 27, 1979
5103
The coup that eventually brought Park Chung Hee to power 18 years ago was carried out swiftly in the early morning hours of May 16, 1961.The coup, planned and executed by a group of five military commanders, led by Kim Jong Pil, a prominent South Korean military leader who had been dismissed a month earlier, and including Lieut. Gen. Chang Do Yung and Maj. Gen. Park Chung Hee, was carried out while most of the country slept.The revolt overthrew Prime Minister John M. Chang that had been elected the year before to replace the 12‐year regime of Syngman Rhee.For most of the ordinary citizens of the country, the coup came as a surprise, although there had been constant grumblings from the South Korean military since Mr. Chang assumed power that the Prime Minister was too “soft” on Communists.The coup began at 3 A.M. when units of marines and paratroops moved into the capital with tanks and artillery. The South Korean units involved in the coup had been under the command of United Nations forces at the time.Witnesses said there was some light resistance at the outset of the coup but the armed forces held the hills around the capital and could fire on Government positions and installations.By 6 A.M., three hours after the coup began, the military had established control over all the major cities. Army troops stood guard at intersections and in front of Government buildings.By the end of the day, the coup leaders had established a Military Revolu- tionary Committee and had dissolved the National Assembly, closed all schools and banks, imposed press censorship, closed all airports and imposed a dusk-to-dawn curfew.Within days, the new junta placed Mr. Chang, who had gone into hiding at the time of the coup, and President Po Sun Yun under house arrest and declared martial law. However, President Yun was later reinstated as chief of state for a brief time.General Chang, who took over as head of government, announced that he would fly to Washington for talks with President Kennedy but the State Department announced that Mr. Kennedy would not be able to see the new South Korean leader and suspended economic aid to Seoul.The coup leaders suspended the constitution and ruled by decree for nearly two months until a split in their ranks prompted the resignation of General Chang. General Park assumed command of the Supreme Council of National Reconstruction and on July 4 accused his former co‐leader of the coup of plotting‐to assassinate him.General Park announced that the military government .would rule the country until general elections in 1983 and would undertake the drafting of a new constitution. General Park also announced he would visit Washington for talks with President Kennedy.The New York TimesSyngman Rhee