http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/16/us/chicago-pays-5-million-to-family-of-black-teenager-killed-by-officer.html
Chicago Pays $5 Million to Family of Black Teenager Killed by Officer - The New York Times
Chicago (Ill),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,McDonald  Laquan (d 2014),Burge  Jon,Reparations
April 15, 2015
7305
CHICAGO —  The City Council here agreed on Wednesday to pay $5 million to the family of a black teenager who was fatally shot by a Chicago police officer last fall, as federal and state prosecutors acknowledged that they were conducting a criminal investigation into the shooting.The council’s decision came swiftly and with no debate, even before a suit had been filed in the case by the family of Laquan McDonald, 17, who the police say was wielding a three-inch knife when an officer shot him 16 times on Oct. 20 on the city’s Southwest Side. The authorities say a dashboard camera on a police squad car captured the confrontation, though the recording has not been made public.Chicago’s settlement in the case came amid increased scrutiny of police shootings around the nation, as well as a flurry of new attention to police conduct in this city, recent and past.In a prosecution that officials described as rare for fatal police shootings here, a Chicago police officer is on trial for involuntary manslaughter, among other charges, in the death of a woman near a park in March 2012. The officer, Detective Dante Servin, who was off duty, shot recklessly into a group of people in a darkened alley, killing Rekia Boyd, prosecutors say. But lawyers for Detective Servin have said he believed he saw someone in the group pulling out an item that looked like a weapon.Separately, the City Council this week began considering a $5.5 million reparations package for scores of victims of abuse and torture by the police here in the 1970s and ’80s under the watch of a notorious police commander, Jon Burge. Mayor Rahm Emanuel announced his support this week for the long-sought reparations, which would include a memorial and a formal apology for the mostly black South Siders who have described being shocked with cattle prods, beaten with phone books and suffocated with plastic bags to compel confessions.The cases involving Mr. Burge and a group of officers under his command had haunted Chicago and its Police Department for years.Since Mr. Burge was fired from the department in 1993, the city has paid out some $85 million in settlements and other costs. Over the years, some of those abused by Mr. Burge and his so-called midnight crew have been cleared and sent home, but efforts are still underway for reviews of the cases of about 20 people who remain in prison.“This has been a long time coming,” said Darrell Cannon, 64, who served more than 24 years in prison for murder after a confession in 1983 that he says was coerced by officers who broke his front teeth when they shoved a gun barrel into his mouth. While he was incarcerated, Mr. Cannon said, he settled a lawsuit claiming torture for $3,000, far less than some.“For the first time, this city is recognizing that black people have been tortured and hurt at the hands of police, and we can take the gains and build on that,” he said. “We’ve been fighting for this for years now.”Provisions of the reparations plan include free tuition at city colleges; psychological counseling and job training for those abused, as well as their families; financial reparations for those with credible claims of torture; and education about what happened in the Burge cases for Chicago Public School students in eighth and 10th grade. Mr. Emanuel this week described Mr. Burge’s actions as a disgrace, adding, “We stand together as a city to try and right those wrongs and to bring this dark chapter of Chicago’s history to a close.”After a four-year inquiry, special prosecutors said in 2010 that their investigation had corroborated the abuse claims. Mr. Burge was never directly charged with abuse because of statutes of limitation, but he was convicted in 2010 of perjury and obstruction of justice in connection with the events. He completed his prison sentence this year and receives a pension of $4,000 a month, officials said.Little has been made public about the shooting of Mr. McDonald last fall. The name and race of the police officer involved, for instance, have not been released; city officials say a union contract bars them from naming the officer at this point. (The officer has been placed on paid desk duty pending the outcome of the investigations.)A video recording from the scene has also not been released because, city officials said, it is part of a criminal investigation by the F.B.I. and by the offices of the United States attorney and the Cook County state’s attorney.From mid-2007 until the end of last year, city records show, Chicago police officers shot some 385 people. Of those, 122, including Mr. McDonald, died.City officials say the police were answering a 911 call about a man with a knife trying to break into vehicles in a trucking yard when they came upon Mr. McDonald on Oct. 20. He refused to drop the knife, the authorities say, and began walking or jogging away.A pair of police officers followed him, one on foot and the other in a car, and called for backup from an officer with a Taser stun gun.At one point, Mr. McDonald pounded on the windshield of the squad car and punctured its front tires with the knife, city officials say, as more officers arrived. In the end, six officers were present when one of them fired a weapon at him, striking him 16 times.