http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/03/books/review/the-english-and-their-history-by-robert-tombs.html
‘The English and Their History,’ by Robert Tombs - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Tombs  Robert,England,The English and Their History (Book),English and Their History  The (Book)
Dec. 31, 2015
4593
Even in free countries it is sometimes necessary to alter the past to suit the present. For instance, I recall the day at my English boarding school in the early 1960s when our sober, patriotic old history books were gathered up and carted away to a storeroom. In their place we were handed bright, optimistic replacements, with a good deal less to say about the empire, the Protestant martyrs or what we had been taught without embarrassment to call the Glorious Revolution.Until then many such schools had been nurseries of tiny colonialists, destined (as we thought) to rule the waves and perhaps the world. Now, word had reached us on our rain-swept hilltop that this era was over. Our future was to be egalitarian, European, internationalist and peace-­loving. The change came too late for me to adapt fully, and my own impression of the national past is still the old heroic melodrama of an unending struggle for liberty, the perilous defense of the home island against tyrannical would-be invaders and chivalrous conquest abroad. I may have been the last person ever to be taught it.So “The English and Their History,” by Robert Tombs, is right to combine a fresh retelling of English history with a thoughtful analysis of the changing ways in which the English themselves have interpreted their past. It successfully does both. Even those to whom the story is familiar will enjoy the deep knowledge lightly worn, the cleverly marshaled facts, the neat demolitions of conventional wisdom and the new insights into what made England so unlike anywhere else on earth. Tombs, a professor of history at the University of Cambridge, is an expert on France, giving him a vantage point from which he can view his own country more clearly than if he knew only his homeland.In this book he bicycles ­pleasingly through the picturesque valleys and stormy moorlands of England’s long adversarial struggle with itself — ­Norman and Saxon, Catholic and Protestant, Roundhead and Cavalier, Whig and Tory, Laborite and Conservative. Arresting details sparkle in the text — where else would one learn that the Crown of England was once pawned to the Archbishop of Trier, who tired of waiting for it to be redeemed and threatened to cut it up? Tombs entertainingly describes England’s frequent aggressive adventures into other people’s countries, not least its immediate ­neighbors.He pauses frequently to examine the curious way in which the English have idealized and sometimes blackened their own past. He often seeks to rescue that past from those who try to make their own eras look good by slandering their forebears as worse and more wretched than they actually were. “Treating the past as grotesque and inferior is the attitude of the tourist who can see nothing ‘Abroad’ but dirt and bad plumbing,” he says. The English, he argues, were almost always prosperous, well fed, well housed and lightly governed, once the Norman Conquest had settled the fundamental question of who controlled the central state and ensured the coasts were safe from invasion.Even in times of revolt, religious strife and civil war, the English held back from the merciless ferocity of Continental Europe. And separation from that continent allowed England to benefit fully from repeated strokes of good luck: a language of wonderful flexibility and subtlety; a legal system that held the state in check and nurtured an astonishing combination of order and liberty; a political system that preserved ancient safeguards against despotism, long after these had been plowed under by French, Spanish and German autocrats.The longevity of English institutions and customs is not merely picturesque, but also a living record of safety, prosperity, strength, civil peace, and political and economic stability. Laws grew thick and strong, like a great forest, and men sheltered contentedly beneath them.And from the earliest years of this lucky millennium, a picturesque legend of England and its history began to influence the way its people and rulers behaved. The real Alfred the Great and the legendary King Arthur both stood in Englishmen’s minds for an ancient liberty to which all men constantly sought to return.Tombs is, as it happens, unbeguiled by this alluring myth, often embroidered by radical troublemakers to give their rebellions legitimacy. He is not even sure the great Civil War was really necessary, and it may well be that the English accidentally wandered into it after they settled on leaving the Reformation half-finished and before they began collecting an absurdly huge and inconveniently scattered empire. In the same way, they blundered into alienating and losing the American colonies. And eventually they rushed without much thought into declaring war on Germany in 1914.Tombs understates the importance of this pivotal moment, probably because of his competing love for France. As he suggests, nobody in France ever thought the 1914 war against Germany was pointless. For the French it was an unavoidable struggle for continued existence. But for England it was a war of choice, and in the century that has followed, that choice has begun to seem more and more unwise. It turned England from a creditor to a debtor nation, finished her naval supremacy, destroyed Protestant Christianity as a major social force, began the collapse of the empire, triggered the breakup of the United Kingdom itself and led, in the end, to the rather desperate decision of her elite to pass their sovereignty furtively to the European Union.Despite his general clearsightedness, Tombs is reluctant to acknowledge that England, in these rackety, uncertain times, has entered a new and perplexing stage in its long story. He concludes that the English still live “comfortably and safely.” Yet he notes several developments that may menace both comfort and safety — immigration on a scale never previously experienced, the growth of private and public debt among a previously thrifty people and the rapid shrinking of the nation’s armed forces.He deals rather briefly with the recent revolution in law and justice, though he rightly notes that formerly untouchable liberties, including free speech and the right to jury trial, are frequently questioned and transgressed, and that there is little protest against this. His view that the 2014 Scottish vote to maintain the union with England was concluded “decisively” may turn out to be premature.As for the European Union, the recent crises over Greece and mass migration have for the first time made an English secession a genuine possibility, with our neighbors in Scotland and Ireland conceivably choosing to stay behind as we turn again to the open sea. Older English people look back fondly on 1940, when we supposedly stood alone. In fact we were a major industrial and exporting power with a global navy, more or less self-­sufficient, nationally cohesive and bolstered by the tribute of a still-great empire. Now all of that is gone. Is it possible that, after a thousand astonishing years, our island story has finally come to a full stop? Will the next great history of our nation and people be written in Chinese?