https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/21/nyregion/rockaway-beach-queens-ferry.html
The Food, Fun and Ferry Service of Rockaway Beach - The New York Times
Ferries,Beaches,Rockaway Beach (Queens  NY)
June 21, 2017
5380
“The transformation of the heart is a wondrous thing, no matter how you land there,” Patti Smith wrote about falling in love with Rockaway Beach in her memoir, “M Train.” Landing there got easier last month when ferry service for $2.75 began, connecting Lower Manhattan and the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens. Adventurous types — surfers, cyclists, sun-seekers and food explorers — as well as those simply looking for an affordable day at the beach, line up hourly at Pier 11, near Wall Street, for the hourlong ride.The speedy 149-seat NYC Ferry features big picture windows and a roof deck, the views grand on both levels when passing under the majestic Verrazano-Narrows Bridge and skimming by sailboats, freighters and cruise ships in New York Harbor. There’s a stop in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, before docking at Beach 108th Street and Beach Channel Drive.From there, it takes about 10 minutes to walk to the beach, doff flip-flops and sink toes into sand the feel of sifted light brown sugar. The lapping waves of the Atlantic dispense a cooling briny mist, though it can be a scorcher on the broad concrete boardwalk, recently completed to replace the wooden one washed out by Hurricane Sandy. Every few blocks, an oasis appears in the form of shaded, appealing snack bars.There is air-conditioning at the newly opened Rockaway Beach Bakery, at 87-10 Rockaway Beach Boulevard, as well as glorious croissants seeded like “everything” bagels and stuffed with honey ham and Swiss cheese. Tracy Obolsky, a pastry chef and surfer, traded in toiling at artificially lit Manhattan restaurants (Cookshop, North End Grill, Esca) to open this sun-drenched storefront tucked amid check-cashing and discount businesses.“It’s hidden like a speakeasy, but it wasn’t intentional,” Mrs. Obolsky said. “A sign wasn’t in the budget.”Her jalapeño and cheddar-studded scones are fluffy as biscuits, her sticky buns light, faintly salty and redolent of brioche French toast. Even a banana loaf is no humdrum affair, moist and caramelized at the edges with brown butter crumble on top. Most treats are under $5, but avid bargain hunters may want to aim for pastry happy hour, Tuesday through Sunday from 3 to 4 p.m., for buy one, get one free on select items.Also new this season is Liquid Bread, a beer garden in a repurposed parking lot at the corner of Beach 101st Street and Rockaway Beach Boulevard, furnished with picnic tables and games such as cornhole, bocce and Ping-Pong. It is open in the late afternoon through 10 p.m. on Sundays and Thursdays. On Fridays and Saturdays, it is open until 11 p.m. Liquid Bread offers a casual menu and a sizable beer list, a siren call for millennial beachgoers. Happy hour deals include dollar oysters on Fridays and two-for-one hot dogs (as long as a forearm) on Saturdays.Through Oct. 9, an exhibition called “14 Sculptors Inc. on the Rock” is dressing up Shore Front Parkway, from Beach 74th Street to Beach 108th Street. Made of materials like stainless steel and wood, some sculptures have aquatic themes: breaching whales, sea horses and a blue-green mermaid whose tail and hair are fashioned from sparkly potato chip bags. A few are kinetic works, vibrating from ocean breezes or planes on the flight path to and from nearby Kennedy International Airport.From time to time, the low-flying jets overhead or the A train rumbling by are jolting reminders that Rockaway Beach is part of New York City. Otherwise, the laid-back environment feels like the cheapest, easiest seashore getaway imaginable.