https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/us/homeland-security-to-release-up-to-15000-new-seasonal-visas.html
U.S. to Release Up to 15,000 New Visas for Seasonal Workers - The New York Times
Foreign Workers,Visas,Summer (Season),Homeland Security Department
July 17, 2017
511
LOS ANGELES — The Department of Homeland Security announced on Monday that it will release up to 15,000 additional seasonal visas, known as H-2B visas, to businesses that prove they will be severely hampered without foreign workers.Businesses in the tourism sector, many of which have been scrambling to clean hotel rooms, staff restaurants and perform other tasks during the peak summer months, welcomed the announcement but expressed concern that the government was offering too few visas, creating more red tape that could delay the arrival of workers to the tail end of the season.“I am desperately needing help, but it is going to take me a long time to gather all the new stuff they’re demanding,” Sarah Diment, owner of the Beachmere Inn, an upscale seaside resort in Ogunquit, Me., said as she studied the requirements for the new visas. Still, she predicted, “those visas will be gobbled up.”Ms. Diment, who closed a section of her hotel earlier in the season because of a dearth of workers, has since relied on overtime and the good will of a limited staff.She said she hoped to secure enough visas to hire six housekeepers and a cook; the season begins to taper off in September.Each year, the government makes available 66,000 H-2B visas, which are divided between the winter and summer seasons. The summer allotment has been quickly exhausted because Congress, concerned about the visa program’s impact on American workers, chose in December not to renew a provision that did not count workers who previously had H-2B visas against the quota. That decision halved the number of available visas.Congress then gave the homeland security secretary, John F. Kelly, the authority to release more visas, which a bipartisan group of lawmakers had been calling on him to do since May.“Congress gave me the discretionary authority to provide temporary relief to American businesses in danger of suffering irreparable harm due to a lack of available temporary workers,” Mr. Kelly said in a statement. “As a demonstration of the administration’s commitment to supporting American businesses, D.H.S. is providing this one-time increase to the congressionally set annual cap.”Before being granted a seasonal visa, businesses must show that they have tried to fill vacancies with domestic workers by placing advertisements. They must also attest, under penalty of perjury, that their businesses will suffer permanent and severe financial loss if they are not allowed to hire foreign workers.“For some, it’s not enough and it’s way too late,” said Dan Kowalski, an immigration lawyer in Colorado whose clients include many landscapers. “For other employers, the attestation is too daunting.”