https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/briefing/brexit-migrants-tour-de-france.html
‘Brexit,’ Migrants, Tour de France: Your Tuesday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 18, 2017
42
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Britain’s negotiations with the European Union on its withdrawal from the bloc resumed in Brussels. Here’s a brief explainer.Some derided the absence of documents British negotiators, above right, brought to the table as a sign that the government of Prime Minister Theresa May was unprepared.David Davis, Britain’s negotiator, has returned to London. Meanwhile, the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge  are visiting Poland and Germany this week._____• In Italy, organized crime has embezzled millions of euros in government money from efforts to shelter migrants at increasingly crowded reception centers, investigators say.At one center in Calabria, migrants were eating rancid chicken or not eating at all as a priest who helped manage the center spent lavishly on restaurants and hotels, the authorities say.E.U. foreign ministers decided to restrict sales of dinghies and engines to Libya in an attempt to curb trafficking across the Mediterranean._____• For now, President Trump’s effort to replace the Affordable Care Act is over: The Republican health bill has collapsed, with two more senators opposing it.The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, above, can now seek either a difficult conservative consensus or a bipartisan measure with Democrats to fix the health care flaws that both parties acknowledge.And we asked the government’s departing top ethics official for his assessment of the Trump administration. His answer: “I think we are pretty close to a laughingstock at this point.” Here are his recommendations._____• Russia is pressing the Trump administration to return two waterfront compounds in the U.S. that the Obama administration ordered Russian diplomats to vacate over the Kremlin’s meddling in American elections. The video above explains.Mr. Trump defended his son’s meeting with a Kremlin-backed lawyer last year as “just politics,” but interviews with politicians have turned up few who would say they would participate in such an encounter.Yuri Chaika, the Russian prosecutor general, is widely considered to have provided the dirt on Hillary Clinton that led to the meeting. He is a master at smearing rivals with compromising material._____• The Tour de France resumes after a rest day. Only six stages are left.Our correspondent looks at the longtime tradition of cycling fans camping out in the mountains for days, or even weeks, to claim a coveted place along the course. Wine flows, food is shared and pétanque is played.“If the cyclists never came up on Sunday, we’d still be O.K.,” a Dutch spectator said._____• In Russia, Rosneft’s clashes with private firms reflect increased infighting among the elite as the overall economy stagnates.• Activist investors are aiming higher. Nelson Peltz, a billionaire investor, is seeking a board seat at Procter & Gamble, the consumer products behemoth.• Netflix shares soared as the video streaming service said it added more subscribers than expected. It now has 104 million subscribers worldwide.•  Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• In Afghanistan, 1,662 civilians were killed in the first six months of 2017, a record. There was a 23 percent rise in women killed. [The New York Times]• Wildfires continue to cripple tourism and agriculture in parts of southern Europe amid hot weather. Expect temperatures as high as 35 degrees Celsius in Paris. Farmers in parts of Spain and Italy fear a “catastrophic” harvest. [Reuters]• Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, is in Hungary in the first such visit since the end of the Cold War. The local Jewish community laments his silence on what they see as anti-Semitic overtures by the Hungarian government. [The Times of Israel]• British doctors warned about the safe use of contact lenses after finding 27 contact lenses in a patient’s eye. [The New York Times]• After heated debate among aides, President Trump will again recertify the Iran nuclear deal. As a candidate, he repeatedly condemned it. [The New York Times]• Chinese Navy ships are headed to the Baltic Sea for the first naval exercises with Russia there. [Tass]• Tens of thousands of Americans who took out private loans to pay for college may get their debts wiped away because some critical paperwork is missing. [The New York Times]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• If you’ve yet to master roast chicken, we have you covered.• Traveling this summer? Here are six tips to better pack your suitcase.• Better to be prepared than stuck in an emergency without the right gear.• In an Op-Ed, a Columbia Law School professor warns that bots represent a serious threat to democracy. “The problem is almost certain to get worse,” he writes.• At a former prison in Amsterdam, which now shelters asylum seekers, a pop-up art gallery gives migrant artists an opportunity to tell their stories.• Apple prepares to roll out new emojis. There are ones for zombies, nausea and sandwiches.• Finally, it’s the 200th anniversary of Jane Austen’s death, and Britain will celebrate the day by unveiling a 10-pound note honoring the novelist. Test your knowledge of her life and work with our quiz.Some images are so striking that they stay with you. The photo that has entered online lore as the first to be posted on the World Wide Web is on the quirkier side.What many associate as the internet, the web was in its infancy 25 years ago when its creator, Tim Berners-Lee, asked a colleague at the European Organization for Nuclear Research for a photo he could use.The picture he was given was of Les Horribles Cernettes, an all-woman doo-wop musical group that took its name from CERN, the acronym for the organization on the French-Swiss border with which the members were all associated.With a fan base of physicists, the group’s songs tended toward the scientific: “Strong Interaction,” “Surfing on the Web” and “Microwave Love.”Although it’s impossible to say for sure if their photo was, in fact, the very first to be posted online, it was an early step in the transformation of a communication system used by scientists into the internet we know today.A British newspaper interviewed some of the group’s members 20 years after the picture was taken. “It is quite funny that now with Facebook and blogging that sort of picture is common place on the Web,” one said. “It was just girls being girls. We were asked to ‘strike a pose’ and we did.”Lauren Hard contributed reporting._____This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters here.Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.