https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/01/us/politics/trump-cabinet-nominations-senate.html
2 G.O.P. Senators to Vote Against Betsy DeVos as Education Secretary - The New York Times
DeVos  Elizabeth (1958- ),Trump  Donald J,Appointments and Executive Changes,Senate,Collins  Susan M,Murkowski  Lisa,Republican Party,Democratic Party,Education Department (US),Education (K-12),Special Education
Feb. 1, 2017
6793
WASHINGTON — Two Republican senators on Wednesday said they would vote against President Trump’s nominee for education secretary, delivering a blow to the White House and raising the possibility that Vice President Mike Pence would have to break a tie to win her confirmation.The nominee, Betsy DeVos, a billionaire with a complex web of financial investments, had already faced fierce opposition from Democrats and labor unions because of her political contributions to Republicans and her involvement in pushing alternatives to public education. But her confirmation hearing in front of the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, during which she flubbed answers on education policy, also brought concerns from Republicans.Senator Lisa Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, said Ms. DeVos had failed to demonstrate that she understood what public schools needed to succeed. “I have serious concerns about a nominee to be secretary of education who has been so involved in one side of the equation, so immersed in the push for vouchers, that she may be unaware of what actually is successful within the public schools, and also what is broken and how to fix them,” Ms. Murkowski said.Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, said she respected Ms. DeVos’s clear devotion to students and “valuable work” in education. But she said she remained troubled by Ms. DeVos’s focus on alternatives to public education, as well as what Ms. Collins called a “lack of familiarity” with federal laws protecting children with special needs and disabilities.“Her concentration on charter schools and vouchers, however, raises the question about whether or not she fully appreciates that the secretary of education’s primary focus must be on helping states and communities, parents, teachers, school board administrators, school board members and administrators strengthen our public schools,” Ms. Collins said. “I will not, I cannot, vote to confirm her as our nation’s next secretary of education.”Senators and education advocates from both sides of the aisle were taken aback by Ms. DeVos’s comments at her Jan. 17 confirmation hearing about core responsibilities of the Department of Education.  One exchange with Senator Tim Kaine, Democrat of Virginia, was later promoted heavily on social media by the Democratic Party and activist groups, including national education unions.In it, Mr. Kaine asked Ms. DeVos whether all schools that receive public money should have to follow the requirements of the Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, known as IDEA. Ms. DeVos responded, “I think that’s a matter that’s best left to the states.”In fact, under IDEA, a landmark 1975 civil rights law, states and school districts are required to provide special education services to children with disabilities. During the hearing, Ms. Collins said she had “heard repeatedly” from school officials that the most important action the federal government could take on education would be “to fulfill the promise” of IDEA by providing more funding for those students.Ms. DeVos responded to Ms. Collins that she would look at funding levels, but said, “Maybe the money should follow individual students instead of going directly to the states.”The pushback against Ms. DeVos played out in thousands of emails and phone calls urging senators to vote against her. Protesters showed up at her confirmation hearing, outside senators’ offices and in Michigan, where Ms. DeVos has been involved in pushing education policies.Her nomination now hangs precariously on whether Republicans will rally the support of a few undeclared colleagues, or woo Democratic dissenters. Her chances got a boost on Wednesday with the support of two Republicans who were originally believed to oppose her, Senators Dean Heller of Nevada and Patrick J. Toomey of Pennsylvania.If the Senate’s Democrats and independents vote together, just one more Republican defection would be fatal to Ms. DeVos’s prospects. If all other senators vote along party lines, Mr. Pence could break a 50-50 tie in his capacity as president of the Senate. But three Republican votes opposing her confirmation would result in an outright rejection of her nomination.Ms. DeVos’s opponents said on Wednesday that they would target specific Republicans, including Mr. Heller and Senator Rob Portman of Ohio.If enough senators oppose Ms. DeVos, it would be just the second time in history that the Senate rejected a nominee for a first-term president assembling his cabinet, according to the Senate Historical Office.After Ms. Collins’s and Ms. Murkowski’s announcements, the Senate opened consideration of Ms. DeVos’s nomination Wednesday, scheduling the first procedural hurdle to her confirmation for Friday. But amid strong Democratic opposition, it looks unlikely that the Senate’s final vote will come until early next week.The president of the National Education Association, Lily Eskelsen García, said educators, parents and students were “grateful” for the opposition by Ms. Collins and Ms. Murkowski. “The nation is speaking out; senators need to listen,” Ms. Eskelsen García said.Dan Cantor, national director of the Working Families Party, which has been organizing protests outside senators’ offices, said his group would be holding regular protests at Mr. Heller’s office. Opponents of Ms. DeVos said they would target other Republicans, including Mr. Portman.“The DeVos family has given millions to elect Republicans, but that shouldn’t buy her a cabinet post,” Mr. Cantor said. “The first step was unity from the Senate Democrats. Now we’re going to keep up that pressure on Senate Republicans.”Democrats, teachers unions and liberal protesters have voiced concern about the DeVos family’s contributions to groups that support so-called conversion therapy for gay people; Ms. DeVos’s more than $200 million in donations to Republicans and their causes; and her past statements that government “sucks” and that public schools are a “dead end.” Opponents have also focused on the poor performance of charter schools in Detroit, which Ms. DeVos has bankrolled even as she resisted legislation that would have blocked chronically failing charter schools from expanding.The White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, swiftly brushed off the defections as inconsequential, saying he had “zero” concern about Ms. DeVos’s confirmation by the Senate.Ms. DeVos’s opponents were undeterred.“The more people get to know how ill equipped Betsy DeVos is to strengthen public schools, how disconnected she is from public schools, and how her record has been focused on pursuing for-profit charters and vouchers, and not children, the more the people who believe in the importance of public education are joining to oppose her,” said Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers.Meanwhile, in a display of fierce resistance against Mr. Trump that played out in a proxy battle against his nominees, Senate Democrats again boycotted committee votes on the nominations of Representative Tom Price and Steven T. Mnuchin, the president’s picks to lead the Department of Health and Human Services and the Treasury, respectively. Democrats argued that new information had emerged to suggest that the two nominees had not been truthful in their confirmation testimony.Determined not to be thwarted, the committee’s Republicans broke with the longstanding practice that at least one member of the minority party be present and held the votes anyway, unanimously agreeing to send the nominations to the Senate floor.At the same time, a divided Senate Judiciary Committee greenlighted Senator Jeff Sessions’s nomination as attorney general along a straight party-line vote, sending it to the full Senate for a final vote. Democrats also boycotted a planned committee vote Wednesday on Scott Pruitt, Mr. Trump’s choice to lead the Environmental Protection Agency, and continued to slow down consideration of Representative Mick Mulvaney, his pick for White House budget director.