https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/20/theater/david-tennant-a-former-doctor-who-dons-a-monarchs-crown.html
David Tennant, a Former Doctor Who, Dons a Monarch’s Crown - The New York Times
Tennant  David,Theater,Royal Shakespeare Co,Brooklyn Academy of Music,Shakespeare  William,Television,Doctor Who (TV Program),Jessica Jones (TV Program),Richard II (Play)
March 16, 2016
4927
There are probably young actors today who look back a short distance to a performance by David Tennant — playing the Doctor in “Doctor Who,” or Alec Hardy in “Broadchurch,” or Kilgrave in “Jessica Jones” — as a formative influence on their work and career. Mr. Tennant, 44, looks back a bit further, to the late 1980s, when the Royal Shakespeare Company brought “Hamlet” to Glasgow with Mark Rylance in the title role.“It was life-changing,” Mr. Tennant said during an interview in New York late last year. “I was so blown away that back I went to see it on the Saturday matinee before they left again. Because I couldn’t believe it was so vivid and so extraordinary.”American theatergoers will have the opportunity to assess Mr. Tennant’s own theater work, and perhaps be blown away by it, when he makes his United States stage debut with the Royal Shakespeare Company in “Richard II” at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Part of a production of the tetralogy known as the Henriad — “Richard II” plus Shakespeare’s three Henry plays — it will run in repertory from Thursday, March 24, through April 29.Mr. Tennant, who is Scottish, is known in America for his work in popular science fiction, mystery and superhero television series, but his roots in theater run deep. He first joined the Royal Shakespeare Company as a 25-year-old in 1996, playing Touchstone in “As You Like It” and later Romeo in “Romeo and Juliet.” The performances at the Academy of Music commemorate the 400th anniversary of Shakespeare’s death but also the 20th anniversary of Mr. Tennant’s Royal Shakespeare debut.“It has a certain symmetry to it, doesn’t it?” he said. “A company I’m involved with on so many levels, really, and it’s been such a huge part of my life.”Film and TV work increasingly pulled Mr. Tennant away from the stage in the early 2000s. But Gregory Doran, who had directed him in Tom Stoppard’s “The Real Inspector Hound” at the Royal Shakespeare in 1998, drew him back in 2008 with an offer he couldn’t refuse.“I said to him, ‘Anyone who can play the romantic Romeo and the almost impenetrable Touchstone should be able to play Hamlet,’” Mr. Doran said recently by phone from Hong Kong, where the Henry plays were being performed before their visit to Brooklyn. That 2008 production — featuring another stage-and-TV star, Patrick Stewart — was a critical and popular success and paved the way for their collaboration on Mr. Doran’s Henriad cycle, first performed in Britain in 2013.Reviewing the original British production of “Richard II” in The New York Times, Ben Brantley wrote: “Mr. Tennant has always registered as a slightly alien presence, rather like a more rarefied Johnny Depp. This suits the portrayal of a doomed, disastrously sheltered 14th-century monarch.”Joseph V. Melillo, the executive producer of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, saw Mr. Tennant’s performance for the first time recently, on video. “There’s a kind of gentleness in his acting, his interpretation, that you don’t often see,” he said by phone a few days later. “It’s not the kind of bravura physicality, it’s much more internalized and soft. It’s fascinating.”Sheltered because he took the throne at the age of 10, Richard II was deposed at 32 and died in captivity the following year; Shakespeare’s play covers the last two years of his life.“If you are in a world where the divine right of kings is a thing, and as a child you’re told, ‘God has chosen you to lead these people,’ and you’re then surrounded by acquiescence and adulation, what does that do to you?” Mr. Tennant asked. “How does that form the man you become? That’s what fascinates me about trying to find a center for who this character was.”One of the things about Mr. Tennant’s portrayal that drew the most notice in Britain — and will be on display again in Brooklyn — was Richard’s cascading hair. (Accomplished with extensions in the original production, the ’do will be a wig this time around.) It was a choice in keeping with his rarefied approach to the character.“I liked the idea that he would alight on something he found rather beautiful,” Mr. Tennant said. “He’s an aesthete. If he found it rather glorious, there’d be no one to challenge that it was wrong or unacceptable or not what men did. From that, we got the idea that he would have gold leaf on his fingernails. It was looking for a few things that would set him apart, because he could. Because no one would tell him he couldn’t.”Sitting for an interview in a Manhattan hotel bar, a pot of tea at his elbow, Mr. Tennant was in town doing publicity for the Netflix series “Jessica Jones,” which had been released a few days earlier. (His villainous character, Kilgrave, possesses powers of mind control and is obsessed with the heroine.) Just before that he had taken part in his first read-through for the revival of “Richard II,” nearly two years after the British production closed.“Bits of it are all there intact,” he said. “And other bits, it’s like I’ve never seen them before. My wife made a very good analogy, that it’s like stripping wallpaper. Some bits just come off in a wonderful sort of pass, they just fall off the wall. And other bits, you have to pick away at for days.”Mr. Doran, who praised Mr. Tennant as “the most professional of actors” — “You never catch David dropping a line, even” — was not at all worried about his ability to slide back into the role. Asked what Mr. Tennant brought to the character of Richard II in particular, he said: “He was unafraid of, which I think was fantastic, the fact that for three acts of the play he’s almost intolerable. He behaves in a capricious, vain way, and it isn’t really until he gets to the abdication that the man’s humanity comes through. And I thought David caught that particularly well.”Mr. Tennant’s own selection of great Richards included Derek Jacobi’s, Fiona Shaw’s and, more recently, Ben Whishaw’s, in the BBC-PBS series of filmed adaptations called “The Hollow Crown.”“Just before I was going to do it, someone gave me a copy, and I said, ‘I’ll watch this.’ I should never have done that. Because Ben Whishaw is an extraordinary actor. And he does it beautifully, in ways I could never even aspire to.”In Brooklyn, appearing in just “Richard II,” Mr. Tennant will be doing only a couple of shows a week. But there’s no rest for this international star: On April 23, between performances in Brooklyn, he’ll fly back to Stratford-upon-Avon to host a live Royal Shakespeare Company broadcast marking the anniversary of Shakespeare’s death.After “Doctor Who,” Mr. Tennant starred in the wildly popular British murder drama “Broadchurch” and its much less popular, short-lived American adaptation, “Gracepoint.” A third season of “Broadchurch” is finally to be filmed this summer.He has also somehow found the time to revisit the character who continues to define his career, recording a series of “Doctor Who” audio dramas scheduled for broadcast in May.“It was surprisingly easy to slip back into that time,” he said. “It could have felt more awkward than it did.”Mr. Tennant’s continuous run on the show ended in 2010, but he has no trouble acknowledging that no matter how many Shakespearean roles he takes on, he’ll never shake the time-and-space-traveling Doctor.“I often say that the first line of the obituary has been written, because ‘Doctor Who’ has such a reach,” he said. “It’s so loved and noticed, it’s part of the cultural furniture. To be associated with that show, it’ll be hard to do anything that reduces the impact of that. Which I’m fine with, by the way.”