https://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/28/arts/television/star-wars-rebels-emulates-the-trilogy-of-old.html
‘Star Wars Rebels’ Emulates the Trilogy of Old - The New York Times
Television,Star Wars Rebels (TV Program),Movies,Star Wars (Movie),Animated Films,Lucasfilm Ltd,Disney Channel,Lucas  George,Rebels (TV Program)
Sept. 25, 2014
6628
SAN FRANCISCO — Forget the new “Star Wars” movie for now. At Lucasfilm headquarters here, the pressure is arguably more intense on a new animated TV series: “Rebels,” making its cable debut early next month, not only represents a dramatic shift back to non-prequel stories — for the first time since 1998 — it also formally ushers in the studio’s Disney era.In short, “Rebels” is the runway that J. J. Abrams’s “Episode VII” will use next year in its bid for box office lightspeed.But nobody can say for sure how the very vocal “Star Wars” fan base will react to the TV show, which will have its premiere on Friday on Disney Channel before moving to its brother network Disney XD. George Lucas is no longer involved, having sold Lucasfilm to Disney for $4 billion two years ago, and more than a few “Star Wars” loyalists still distrust the Magic Kingdom’s intentions. Will “Rebels” be overly cute? Jedi Minnie and Obi-Wan Mickey?“If you mess up,” said Freddie Prinze Jr., who voices a ponytailed Jedi in the new series, “there is no cage.”For these reasons and others — “Rebels” is critical, for instance, to the future of Disney’s lightly watched XD channel — this is no ordinary animated series. To make sure the “Star Wars” base is on board while successfully introducing the space opera to a new generation, longtime Lucasfilm artists have painstakingly engineered the series to sound, look and feel like the 1977 movie that started it all.The Oscar-nominated supervising sound editor Matthew Wood, a 24-year Lucasfilm veteran, incorporated effects from the original film — the steady metallic hum of Luke Skywalker’s lightsaber, the putter of Princess Leia’s blockade-running ship. By obsessively sorting through archival files, Joel Aron, a visual effects supervisor who cut his teeth on “Schindler’s List” and “Jurassic Park,” figured out how give the computer-animated “Rebels” a grainy film look akin to that of the original “Star Wars.”“Very analog, very ’70s-looking” is how Kilian Plunkett, an art director known for an older animated series, “Star Wars: The Clone Wars,” described the “Rebels” scenery, cities, spacecraft and characters.Dave Filoni, who led “Clone Wars” and cocreated “Rebels,” labored to instill the new series with all of the original “Star Wars” hallmarks: the distinct notes of humor and tragedy, the unique pacing, the retro lighting.As Gary Marsh, president of Disney Channels Worldwide, put it, “We were determined to echo both thematically and artistically what George Lucas first did 37 years ago.”In case you need a Wookiee to pound it into you: Disney is changing Lucasfilm. It is trying to steer the boutique studio back to its glory days and away from the overwrought prequels — “The Phantom Menace,” “Attack of the Clones” and “Revenge of the Sith” in theaters and “The Clone Wars” on television — that were loved by some devotees, loathed by others and more or less tolerated by most.“I know a lot of fans were worried when Disney bought Lucasfilm,” Mr. Filoni said. “ ‘Oh, no! What are they going to do?’ Hopefully, ‘Rebels’ will end that once and for all. They really want to get it right.”“Star Wars Rebels” got its start in spring 2013, not long after Disney bought Lucasfilm. Returning the franchise to bedrock would help introduce it to a new generation. Mr. Abrams’s similarly old-school movie would follow. “Continuity” became a watchword. (Mr. Filoni said that Mr. Lucas, unconcerned in recent years that his stories had become confusing, once told him, “Continuity is for wimps.”)Lucasfilm and Disney decided “Rebels” would be set ever so slightly before the first “Star Wars” movie. The Galactic Empire is tightening its grip on Outer Rim planets, including Lothal, where a teenage street urchin, Ezra, joins up with the rebel occupants of the starship the Ghost: Kanan, a Jedi survivor in hiding; Zeb, a brawny purple enforcer; Sabine, a female version of the mercenary Boba Fett from the films; and Hera, an ace pilot and maternal figure.Stealing scenes is Chopper, a cantankerous old droid reminiscent of R2-D2. He emits a “a rusty squeak — too clacky, too clicky,” Mr. Wood said.Chopper often bumbles his way to saving the day. In one early scene that gets a big laugh, he bumps his head.“We want those little details to be perfect,” said David Acord, another Lucasfilm supervising editor. “Should that bump sound like a metal tap? Or should it be a sillier frying pan clunk?” (Frying pan.)Mr. Wood added: “It’s not like we say, ‘O.K., we’re working on a TV show, we’re going to drop the bar from what we do on movies.’ It has to be just as good.”Animation aficionados will notice that “Rebels,” while clearly computer animated, has a spare visual style (particularly in nature settings) and rich color palette (burned oranges, lush blues), that is reminiscent of the work of Hayao Miyazaki, the Japanese animé master. Mr. Filoni said that was intentional, a nod to one of his heroes. The other primary visual influence came from Ralph McQuarrie, the conceptual artist responsible for the look of classic “Star Wars” spacecraft and characters, including Darth Vader and Chewbacca. (He died in 2012.)Although “Rebels” looks expensive — Lucasfilm declined to talk numbers — the creative team was clearly aware of working on a budget. “We liked the idea of focusing on a small group of people, in part because it would mean fewer big battles that would cost us a lot of money,” Mr. Filoni said.Mr. Plunkett, the art director, added, “We avoided long hair, which is not easy on a TV schedule and budget.”At times, the “Rebels” crew found itself a little too close to the original “Star Wars,” Mr. Plunkett said. The Ghost spacecraft, for instance, initially looked “too on-the-nose Millennium Falcon-flavored,” he said. So the final design shifted toward a diamond shape.“It’s still reminiscent of the Falcon, but that’s O.K.,” Mr. Plunkett said. “The Falcon isn’t the only pickup truck in the world.”He credited Disney with influencing Chopper’s final design. “They worried he looked too much like R2-D2, and they were right,” he said. The sidekick droid initially had a round head; now it’s shaped like the bottom of a bucket.Although Disney and Lucasfilm expect adult fans to watch “Rebels,” the series is very specifically aimed at children. In other words, the tone will not closely resemble “The Clone Wars,” which ran on Cartoon Network from 2008 to 2013 and was at times less a fun animated romp than hard-edge drama. Mr. Lucas famously used “Clone Wars” to comment on whatever was on his mind; multiple episodes explored the global banking crisis. (A Lucasfilm spokeswoman said Mr. Lucas, who is retired and was given a “Rebels” screening this month, was not available for an interview.)Disney hopes “Rebels” will finally put the five-year-old Disney XD on the map. The channel, aimed at boys 6 to 14 and available in 80 million homes, has lacked a breakout hit, with the somber “Tron: Uprising” a particular disappointment.“We spoke to Lucasfilm extensively about including more comedy,” said Mr. Marsh of Disney Channels Worldwide. “The comedic element is what’s going to make ‘Rebels’ break through.”Words like that make some fans tense up. They worry — perhaps irrationally, given Disney’s strong track record with two other acquisitions, Marvel Entertainment and Pixar — that the company will exert too much control over Lucasfilm artists.“It’s a love-hate thing,” explained Tyler Blevins, a 22-year-old “Star Wars” addict who attended Comic-Con International in July wearing a full-body Stormtrooper costume. “We love Disney. But we don’t yet trust that they love us, the fans, and that this big global conglomerate truly understands the ‘Star Wars’ DNA.”The good news: While there are still holdouts (“too ‘Disney,’” ScreenRant.com wrote recently of “Rebels” clips), early blogger reaction has been mostly positive.“I just want every ‘Star Wars’ fan to know that greatness is coming our way,” wrote Jason Ward, the editor of the MakingStarWars blog, after catching “Rebels” footage at Comic-Con. “They’ve nailed this. Disney’s first real outing with ‘Star Wars’ is a success.”From his lips to Yoda’s ears.