https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/22/us/politics/sanctuary-cities-jeff-sessions.html
Sessions Narrows Trump’s Order Against Sanctuary Cities - The New York Times
Illegal Immigration,Immigration and Emigration,Sessions  Jefferson B III,Executive Orders and Memorandums,United States Politics and Government,Justice Department,Federal Aid (US),Orrick  William H II
May 22, 2017
4294
Attorney General Jeff Sessions on Monday clarified President Trump’s executive order on so-called sanctuary cities, narrowly defining such jurisdictions — and the money they could expect to receive from the federal government — in a way that appeared to fall far short of Mr. Trump’s previous threats to starve all federal funding from localities that limit their cooperation with federal immigration enforcement.Later on Monday, the Justice Department asked a federal court in California to reconsider a ruling that blocked the order last month.In a two-page memorandum, Mr. Sessions announced that the Trump administration would withhold certain types of federal aid from jurisdictions that “willfully refuse to comply” with a single federal immigration law. That statute requires cities, counties and states to allow local agencies and officials to exchange information about people’s immigration status with federal immigration authorities.Only federal grants from the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security would be affected, Mr. Sessions said.But Mr. Sessions suggested that the Justice Department might attach new conditions to future grants. That left open the possibility of requiring local governments to honor requests from federal immigration authorities to detain unauthorized immigrants so that immigration officers can take them into custody. Sanctuary cities commonly fail to comply with such requests.“Going forward, the department, where authorized, may seek to tailor grants to promote a lawful system of immigration,” Mr. Sessions wrote.The memo came the month after a federal judge temporarily blocked the administration from cutting off funding to sanctuary cities, determining that the president had overstepped his authority in attaching conditions to federal money. Government lawyers had argued that the administration did not have large amounts of money in mind.But the judge, William H. Orrick of United States District Court in San Francisco, noted in his ruling that Mr. Trump and Mr. Sessions had vowed to go much further. The Justice Department’s motion asking the court to reconsider the temporary injunction on Monday leaned on Mr. Sessions’ memo to stress the limited number of grants at stake.Mr. Trump’s executive order on immigration, signed on Jan. 25, appeared to take a much harder line with sanctuary cities.“Sanctuary jurisdictions across the United States willfully violate federal law in an attempt to shield aliens from removal from the United States,” the order said. “These jurisdictions have caused immeasurable harm to the American people and to the very fabric of our Republic.”Yet since that initial threat, the administration has not moved to withhold any federal aid from sanctuary cities. One step it did take offered something of a preview of Mr. Sessions’ memo. Days before Judge Orrick’s ruling last month, the Justice Department sent letters to officials in New York City, Philadelphia, New Orleans and a handful of other localities, warning them that they stood to lose some minor grants unless they could certify that they were in compliance with the same statute Mr. Sessions mentioned on Monday.Responses are due by June 30. A spokesman for New York City’s Law Department, Nick Paolucci, said Monday that the city planned to issue a legal opinion in June confirming that it was in compliance.It remains to be seen whether the administration will seek to cut off more funding.On Monday, the San Francisco city attorney, Dennis Herrera, whose lawsuit over the executive order was one of two to prompt Judge Orrick’s temporary ruling, said in a statement that he was not convinced that the Trump administration would stop at a few grants.“This guidance memo is coming from an administration that has a different explanation for things seemingly every time you turn around,” he said. “We can’t trust this administration not to make good on its threats.”