https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/14/us/politics/obama-russia-hack-democrats.html
Loath to Meddle in Election, Obama Delayed Blaming Russia for D.N.C. Hack - The New York Times
Cyberwarfare and Defense,Classified Information and State Secrets,Espionage and Intelligence Services,Democratic National Committee,Presidential Election of 2016,Trump  Donald J,Russia,Federal Bureau of Investigation,Obama  Barack,United States Politics and Government
Dec. 14, 2016
6916
WASHINGTON — The Obama administration spent months deliberating whether to blame Russia for a cyberattack on the Democratic National Committee, with action delayed in part because President Obama did not want to be blamed for politicizing intelligence, the White House said on Wednesday.Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said that “it would’ve been inappropriate for White House figures — including the president of the United States — to be rushing the intelligence community to expedite their analysis of the situation.”In particular, he described White House concerns that any statement by Mr. Obama would be viewed as using intelligence to meddle in the election on behalf of the president’s preferred candidate, Hillary Clinton.An F.B.I. agent initially tried in September 2015 to alert officials from the Democratic National Committee that it was the target of a cyberattack by a group of hackers with links to Russian intelligence. But the administration waited until October 2016, more than a year later and after months of damaging leaks, to confirm that intelligence agencies believed the hacks were the product of a Russian intelligence operation.An examination by The New York Times found that the response to the intrusions, the first significant information-warfare campaign ever conducted by a foreign power to disrupt a presidential campaign, was plagued by a series of missed signals, slow responses and a continuing underestimation of the seriousness of the cyberattack.Part of the reason for the delay, Mr. Earnest said, was bureaucratic. “First, they had to confirm across 17 different government agencies that they had high confidence that this is exactly what had transpired,” Mr. Earnest said.But the administration’s delayed response also resulted because Donald J. Trump, the Republican nominee, had been making repeated claims about how the election was being rigged, and Mr. Obama did not want to do anything that would feed those charges, Mr. Earnest said.When the Obama administration first took office, it was deeply aware of criticism leveled at the prior administration of President George W. Bush that top officials had sought to shape or politicize intelligence conclusions on whether President Saddam Hussein of Iraq had so-called weapons of mass destruction. Mr. Obama has said that he sought from the first days of his presidency to protect the intelligence process from any hint of political interference.So while Mr. Obama in December 2014 personally condemned North Korea’s hack of Sony Pictures, he was far more reluctant to do so when political operatives were the target of a state-sponsored hack during a presidential campaign.“Given that the president had endorsed a candidate in the presidential race, he believed it was important for the intelligence community to make this announcement,” Mr. Earnest said.The Obama administration has announced that its response to the Russian hack will be proportional and may never be publicly disclosed. Critics say that to discourage further cyberattacks, the administration should have responded quickly and made its response public.But Mr. Earnest cautioned that the United States would be particularly vulnerable in an international cyber-exchange “because we rely on 21st-century communications technology for just about everything in a way that lots of other societies and economies and countries don’t.”He said that much of the damage from the Russian hack resulted from decisions by news organizations to publish emails they knew to be stolen.