https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/05/movies/transformers-spider-man-tupac-shakur.html
Actors Share How They Got the Job - The New York Times
Movies,Actors and Actresses,Shipp  Demetrius Jr,All Eyez on Me (Movie),Stenberg  Amandla (1998- ),Everything  Everything (Movie),Moner  Isabela,Transformers: The Last Knight (Movie),Holland  Tom (1996- ),Spider-Man: Homecoming (Movie),Zahn  Steve,War for the Planet of the Apes (Movie),Hall  Regina,Girls Trip (Movie),Asbille  Kelsey,Wind River (Movie)
May 5, 2017
9538
Sometimes the hardest part isn’t what happens on the set — it’s landing the role in the first place. Here, a handful of actors gracing the screen this summer talk about how they got a crucial job.DEMETRIUS SHIPP JR.“All Eyez on Me” (June 16)Mr. Shipp had heard it before — that he looked like Tupac Shakur. Then an online casting call for a biopic of the rapper was posted in 2011. Though reluctant to try out for what would be his first acting job, Mr. Shipp submitted a tape at the last minute and his father — Demetrius Shipp Sr., who had produced Shakur’s single “Toss It Up” — shared it with LT Hutton, a former Death Row Records producer who was a producer on the movie. The younger Shipp had won an audition.“They’re taking pictures,” Mr. Shipp recalled. “They’re like ‘All right, start losing weight.’ And they’re giving me all these Tupac videos to study. I went bald and got my nose pierced for real.”Then he stopped hearing from them — until 2012, when he was asked to audition again. “So I did,” he said, “the same process of reading with the new casting agency and going on camera. And guess what — no more calls.”2013: “Come read — we’re back at it,” they told him. Silence.2014: Exact same thing.So when asked to return in 2015, he replied: “No way, dude.” But his mother said: “You have to go. This could really be it now.”She was right. Mr. Shipp enrolled in acting classes and lost weight in preparation for a June shoot that year. But, yep, silence — until August when he was asked to read one more time for the director he thought he had previously blown away.Then in September, Mr. Shipp — who by then had been laid off at work and threatened with eviction — saw a casting call for the part. “Oh wow, I’ve dedicated my life to try to get this role, and this is how I find out that I didn’t get it?” he thought.A mere formality, he was reassured. On Nov. 18, 2015 — two days before his 27th birthday — Mr. Shipp learned that the role was officially his.AMANDLA STENBERG“Everything, Everything” (May 19)Though Ms. Stenberg has a starring role this summer, what first made moviegoers sit up was her turn as Rue, the sympathetic young tribute in “The Hunger Games,” a role that at the age of 12 she pushed to get. “I called my agent over and over and over again and said: ‘Look, I know they’re making an adaptation of my favorite book, and there’s a character in this book who is 12 years old and black.’ And that was actually a huge rarity, to find a character like that who was meaningful to the story.”The first audition went well and the casting director told her to dress up like Rue for the callback with the director, Gary Ross. “I went all in, covering myself in mud and twigs and leaves,” she remembered.On the way, she and her parents stopped at a diner. When she went to the bathroom in her dirty get-up, a woman asked her, “‘Do you need help?’ And I said, ‘I’m O.K. — don’t worry.’”Then it was on to meet Mr. Ross. “I basically rolled around in my backyard and then showed up at his very nice house. And I had to be very careful when I arrived to not stain any of his furniture or leave a mud trail.”It worked. Besides showing her dedication, “by the end of it, everyone in the room was crying. They basically told me on the spot that the role was mine.”ISABELA MONER“Transformers: The Last Knight” (June 23)To win a role in the latest “Transformers,” Ms. Moner sent a self-tape from her home in Cleveland. “I was nervous. I had just turned 14 and was intimidated by the fact that it’s such a big franchise and I’d be stepping into one of the leads.”The director Michael Bay wanted to see more and asked her to fly to Los Angeles for a screen test. “The hairstylist said, ‘We’re going to come up with the look for the movie.’ Then Michael walks in and he’s like, ‘We might have to cut your hair.’ I’m like, ‘What? Right now?’” Luckily the new look let her keep her long tresses. “So we dodged a bullet on that one.”She and Mr. Bay went to a studio parking lot, where he asked her to pretend a Transformer was looming above as he filmed. He told her, “‘I want you to shout things at him, be really mean and challenge him.’ So I did what he wanted me to do, and he did as much as he could without actually having to pay me to be there. What was supposed to be a 30-minute meeting turned into a three-hour fun day of just a low-budget ‘Transformers.’”TOM HOLLAND“Spider-Man: Homecoming” (July 7)Mr. Holland, who had learned gymnastics for the title role of “Billy Elliot” in London, had been a fan of Spider-Man since he was a kid. So when he saw that Marvel was rebooting the series, he begged his agent to ask for an audition.Two days later, he was asked to self-tape an audition, then another one and read Spider-Man’s lines. But the film’s casting people swore they weren’t auditioning him for the role.“I was a little confused as to why I was pretending to be Spider-Man if I wasn’t auditioning for him,” Mr. Holland said. “But I guess that was just a ruse.”And during that second self-tape, he did as many back flips as he could. “I was like, ‘Hello, my name is Tom Holland,’ back flip. ‘I’m 5-foot-8,’ side flip. ‘I’m 20 years old,’ back flip. It was just a way for me to get ahead of the crowd and try to get up to the big dogs here at Marvel.”He flipped his way through five more self-tapes, enlisting actors he was working on other projects with, like Joel Kinnaman and Jon Bernthal — and finally landed in a screen test opposite Chris Evans, a.k.a. Captain America.“They had me do a fight scene, and basically I just went to town and did as many back flips as I could possibly do,” he said. “It was amazing fun and I was lucky enough that they cast me.”STEVE ZAHN“War for the Planet of the Apes” (July 14)“I got a call from my agent saying, ‘They’re really interested in you for “Planet of the Apes,”’ and of course I was immediately really interested because it’s like getting a call saying, ‘Hey, you can be in a movie that you watched as a kid.’”A Skype meeting was set with the director Matt Reeves. “I remember thinking, ‘O.K., do I do the whole chimpanzee thing? Yeah, I’ll do like 50 percent.’ It was just bizarre.”“I missed ape camp” — training sessions where the actors focus on movement — and instead he worked with the movement choreographer Terry Notary. “I assumed that immediately it would be very technical and he’d be showing me how to quadruped. And instead we just talked about the essence of chimpanzees and these minute things they do, and I was like, ‘Oh my God, this is going to be a lot harder than I thought.’”For a week he worked with Mr. Notary and Andy Serkis, who stars as Caesar, then practiced in the mirror at night at home. “And I spent hours on YouTube watching chimps at zoos and was always fascinated with the chimp that just sat there, watching, not the one that was running around peeing on everyone. And I was like, ‘Why is that different than a person?’ It was a real daunting thing.”REGINA HALL“Girls Trip” (July 21)For her very first movie role, in “The Best Man,” Ms. Hall was asked to dance.“They didn’t say what kind of dance but obviously she was a stripper,” she remembered. So Ms. Hall called an acting-class friend who had experience with a pole and asked, “What do I do?”Her friend’s reply: “You don’t have to do anything. All you have to do, girl, is just turn around and slap your butt. That’s all it’s going to take.”At the audition, other women performed Janet Jackson routines, but not Ms. Hall. She entered the room, placed a chair as if she were going to sit in it — but then straddled it as the beat began. “And I literally just looked over my shoulder and started hitting my butt,” she said.“O.K., stop the music,” the producer Sam Kitt ordered, before asking, “So, can you do anything else?”“I was like, yes, I can,’” Ms. Hall recalled. “And then I just picked up my coat and I said, ‘Thank you very much, and I left.”She was hired for the role contingent upon working with a dance instructor.KELSEY ASBILLE“Wind River” (Aug. 4)Ms. Asbille had already passed one audition for the role of Natalie Hanson, a young Native-American woman on a Wyoming reservation, but at the callback “I realized I was first up, which made me indescribably nervous.”Thankfully, the writer-director Taylor Sheridan put her at ease and she read some scenes with the casting director. But then Mr. Sheridan asked her to read a poem titled “A Meadow in My Perfect World.”Ms. Asbille found it beautiful and haunting. “It really struck a chord with me even on a personal level; so I felt — or I hoped — that I could do it justice,” she said, and convey the character’s strength and resilience.“I wanted her to live through that poem so much I could barely breathe,” she said. “And I reached the end of the poem and Taylor told me that it’s actually the first time he’d heard the poem aloud since he’d written it.”That poem opens the film.