http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/19/world/asia/john-kerry-north-korea.html
Kerry Calls for More Pressure on North Korea Over ‘Horrendous’ Acts - The New York Times
North Korea,Kerry  John,Nuclear Weapons,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,South Korea,United States International Relations
May 18, 2015
1255
SEOUL, South Korea — Secretary of State John Kerry on Monday called for increased international pressure on the government of the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, berating the country’s pursuit of nuclear weapons and its “horrendous” executions of people close to the leader.“The world is hearing increasingly more and more stories of grotesque, grisly, horrendous, public displays of executions on a whim and fancy by the leader against people who were close to him, sometimes on the flimsiest of excuses,” Mr. Kerry said, referring to Mr. Kim, during a news conference in Seoul, the capital of South Korea.Mr. Kerry made the comment in response to a recent report that Mr. Kim had ordered one of his top generals, the minister of the People’s Armed Forces, Hyon Yong-chol, executed with an antiaircraft gun for disloyalty. General Hyon was accused, among other crimes, of dozing off during a meeting Mr. Kim presided over, the National Intelligence Service of South Korea said last week.Mr. Kerry called Mr. Kim’s government “one of the most egregious examples of reckless disregard for human rights and human beings anywhere on the planet.” He added that Mr. Kim’s behavior only increased the likelihood that he would face charges at the International Criminal Court.Last year, a United Nations panel recommended that its Security Council refer Mr. Kim to the International Criminal Court over human rights violations like operating prison gulags, where the panel said hunger, torture and arbitrary executions were widespread.“That is why it is important for us to ramp up international pressure on North Korea to change its behavior,” Mr. Kerry said during the joint news conference with his South Korean counterpart, Yun Byung-se.“If their horrific conduct continues, it is hard to see how that referral to the criminal court would not take place.”Mr. Kerry said that Washington and its allies would maintain “principled diplomacy” on North Korea, saying that Washington would try to improve ties with North Korea only if it demonstrated “genuine willingness” to address international concern over its nuclear and missile programs and its “atrocities against its own people.”Given the recent reports of executions in North Korea and the testing of a submarine-launched missile, “it is clear that the D.P.R.K. has not even come close to meeting that standard,” Mr. Kerry said, using the initials for the North’s official name, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.His tough words came as the United States and its allies have been working together with China, North Korea’s major ally, to find a way to resume six-nation talks aimed at negotiating an end to the North’s nuclear weapons program.The six-nation talks, which also involved South Korea, Japan and Russia, have been suspended since 2008. In the interim, fear has been growing that the North has been increasing its stockpile of plutonium and uranium fuel for nuclear weapons, as well as making progress toward building an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of delivering a nuclear warhead.Mr. Kerry said the United States was not interested in having “talks for the sake of talks” with Mr. Kim’s government. Instead, he said that Washington and China, as well as American allies, were discussing “ways to increase the pressure and increase the potential of either sanctions or other means to make it clear to him that he is on a very dangerous course.”“No one should be under any illusion,” he said. “This is an individual who has said no to every effort to reach out and find a reasonable way forward.”North Korea did not immediately react to Mr. Kerry’s comment on Monday. In the past, it has been particularly sensitive about the kind of direct American criticism of its leadership that Mr. Kerry delivered.Mr. Kerry’s trip to Seoul, which followed his talks in Beijing over the weekend, was partly to lay the groundwork for a visit to Washington in June by President Park Geun-hye of South Korea.