https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/07/us/politics/betsy-devos-education-secretary-confirmation.html
Betsy DeVos’s Rocky Path as Trump’s Pick for Education Secretary - The New York Times
Trump  Donald J,DeVos  Elizabeth (1958- ),Education Department (US),Vouchers,Charter Schools,Education (K-12),United States Politics and Government
Feb. 7, 2017
6792
From the moment she was introduced in late November as President Trump’s nominee for education secretary, Betsy DeVos has taken heat from not only teachers’ unions but also some charter school advocates and parent groups.Ms. DeVos, a wealthy Republican fund-raiser and philanthropist who is a major supporter of school vouchers, has faced vociferous opposition. Her support for directing taxpayer dollars to privately run schools, and her efforts to shape education in her home state of Michigan and across the country, elicited criticism from opponents who argued that she had neglected the public schools she would be charged with improving as the head of the Department of Education.Ms. DeVos endured a grueling line of questioning from senators during her confirmation hearing last month. While Republicans praised what they called her commitment to education and to children, Democrats said they were startled by many of her answers, which they said laid bare the weaknesses of an education secretary pick who has little experience with public schools.They expressed their concern as well about the potential for conflicts of interest in her complex web of financial investments; Ms. DeVos was the first of Mr. Trump’s nominees not to complete an ethics review before appearing before senators.Ms. DeVos faced a number of uncomfortable questions, which critics said showed a lack of familiarity with laws protecting students with disabilities and the metrics for assessing student progress. In addition to pointing out Ms. DeVos’s inexperience in running a large bureaucracy, Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, questioned how she could manage the Department of Education — the largest provider of student loans — if neither she nor her children had ever borrowed money for school.“So you have no personal experience with college financial aid?” she asked.As demonstrations popped up across the country, thousands of calls and messages flooded the Capitol, many of them urging senators to vote against Ms. DeVos and Mr. Trump’s other nominees.In a move that put Ms. DeVos’s nomination in question, two Republican senators — Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska — announced last week that they would not vote to confirm her, citing the concerns of their constituents. “I have serious concerns about a nominee to be secretary of education who has been so involved in one side of the equation, so immersed in the push for vouchers, that she may be unaware of what actually is successful within the public schools, and also what is broken and how to fix them,” Ms. Murkowski said on the Senate floor.But as most Senate Republicans maintained their support for Ms. DeVos, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, scheduled a rare, early-morning procedural vote on her nomination to press ahead.Senator Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, a former education secretary and chairman of the committee that approved Ms. DeVos in a party-line vote, said she would be “an excellent education secretary.”“She’s committed to public education, and there’s no better example of that than her work on the most important reform of public schools in the last 30 years: public charter schools,” Mr. Alexander said.After gaveling in at 6:30 a.m. Friday, senators voted to limit further debate, setting the stage for a final confirmation vote this week. Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, asked his colleagues to think about their vote over the weekend. “Sometimes loyalty to a president demands a bit too much,” he said.On Monday, Senate Democrats said they would spend the final 24 hours before Ms. DeVos’s confirmation vote speaking out against her on the floor in a last-ditch effort to woo Republicans to their side.But as the evening wore on, it looked increasingly likely that Ms. Collins and Ms. Murkowski would be the only Republican defectors, setting up a 50-50 tie. Vice President Mike Pence is expected to break the deadlock on Tuesday as president of the Senate, offering the 51st vote to confirm Ms. DeVos as education secretary.