https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/22/magazine/before-croissants-there-was-kubaneh-a-jewish-yemeni-delight.html
Before Croissants, There Was Kubaneh, a Jewish Yemeni Delight - The New York Times
Cooking and Cookbooks,Bread,Bakeries and Baked Products,Breads Bakery (Manhattan  NY),Yemen,Recipes
June 22, 2017
6438
All day long I’d been looking forward to going out with friends for dinner, but as we talked between gulps of wine, ripping up the kubaneh we’d ordered and swiping it in grated tomato, I was distracted. The bread was excellent, and in ways that resisted comparison — tall and tan and sweet as brioche, but softer inside, more supple. It pulled apart easily, with the same satisfaction of Parker House rolls, but along more chaotic lines. Like a well-baked croissant, it was golden brown at the edges but impossibly buoyant with butter. We finished it quickly, as if it might unfasten itself from the plate at any second and float away.Kubaneh, a Jewish Yemeni bread, was traditionally cooked overnight on a Friday, low and slow in the residual heat of the hearth, ready for Shabbat breakfast the next day. When Jewish Yemenites came to Israel in the late 19th century, they brought the bread with them, and it’s one of many immigrant dishes that define Israeli cuisine. Meir Adoni, the Moroccan-Israeli chef responsible for the version I had at Nur, told me he couldn’t separate the sweet, yeasted perfume of kubaneh from Shabbat morning.“It should be brown outside, but melting inside and full of air,” he said. For his restaurant in Manhattan, Adoni adapted his recipe so the kubaneh bakes in half an hour instead of overnight, but the keys to its texture hadn’t changed: the hand-shaping process of the yeasted buns, and a nice long proof. With all this in mind, I took a lesson at his partner’s bakery, Breads Bakery, a few blocks away, where cooks make Adoni’s kubaneh daily and deliver it to the restaurant.Kelly Jacques, a manager there, brought the simple dough together in a stand mixer and kneaded it there until it thwapped quite viciously against the sides of the bowl, threatening to topple it. The dough rested for a while before she squashed it in pieces right onto the counter with buttered hands, spreading out shapeless lumps into squares that were almost completely see-through. Jacques rolled these up, as if packing the rugs in a dollhouse, and wound them into coils. I wasn’t familiar with the technique, and as the bread proofed over the next hour, almost doubling in size, the pale, fat, wrinkled buns looked more and more like a greasy jumble of sleeping Shar-Pei puppies.The rolling was messy and mesmerizing to watch, but as Jacques pointed out, it was also a genius way for bakers to build fine layers of fat into the dough. I’d learned about this process, known as lamination, when I was a cook, covering shifts for a night baker. But the process for laminating croissants looked nothing like what Jacques was showing me. I’d used a ruler and a rolling pin to measure an exact rectangular parcel of dough and softened butter, and fed it into the mechanical sheeter to get it long and evenly thin. I’d folded it and rolled it, again and again, before shaping the dough into identical croissants. As they baked, water vapor would push between the layers of dough, turning the pastries into voluminous puffs.Lamination is almost always attributed to the French and Austrian pastry chefs who made it famous and defined by the particulars of their technique. But kubaneh illustrates how lamination was mastered in variations, all over the world, hundreds of years before the croissant impressed people at the 1889 Paris World’s Fair. In her cookbook “King Solomon’s Table,” the author Joan Nathan proposes that lamination most likely traveled through Europe after Yemen became part of the Ottoman Empire, and that the Yemeni bakers who started laminating kubaneh picked up the technique from India, their trade partner across the Arabian Sea, where cooks rolled parathas so that fat shot through the dough in fine, even layers.Like all laminated doughs, kubaneh is a project, but it’s not the kind that requires a ruler or sheeter or even a rolling pin, just buttered hands. At home, I tore the thin dough in places and produced plenty of inconsistently shaped sheer blobs. I worried I’d end up with a sad approximation of what I tried at Nur, but Jacques had encouraged me to forget about perfection, and to keep smooshing the next lump of dough, and the next, rolling with any mistakes. Kubaneh was described to me as forgiving, but I was still surprised when my first attempt came out of the oven so big and beautiful and airy. It was as if there were nothing to forgive in the first place, as if perfection were beside the point.Recipe: Kubaneh (Yemeni Pull-Apart Rolls)