http://www.nytimes.com/2001/12/13/world/flashback-to-deadly-clash-of-68-shakes-mexico.html
Flashback to Deadly Clash of '68 Shakes Mexico - The New York Times
MEXICO CITY (MEXICO),MEXICO,FOX QUESADA  VICENTE,POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT,CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE,DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS,FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
Dec. 13, 2001
9925
On Oct. 2, 1968, soldiers and university students clashed at a rally in the working-class neighborhood of Tlatelolco, a violent night that remains a watershed in Mexico's modern history and has haunted its politics for 33 years.Official accounts maintain that the students opened fire and that fewer than 40 people were killed during a gunfight at the Plaza of Three Cultures. Historians and human rights activists charge that more than 300 people were massacred, just days before Mexico was host to the Olympic Games. Students reported that hundreds of others were injured and about 2,000 were detained, some for more than two years.Though the events have long been clouded by government secrecy and memory of them has been dulled by time, a series of chilling black and white photographs mysteriously emerged this week to offer the first graphic documentation of the role in the violence played by a special security force that called itself the ''Olympia Battalion.''The photographs give new life to the testimonies repeated year after year by the students who were there, and raise fresh questions about the credibility of past government denials. In one frame after another, the photos show the faces of frightened young men paraded before a camera by plainclothes gunmen wearing one white glove, the signature of the special force.Published on Sunday in Proceso, the 21 photographs were anonymously delivered to the magazine's correspondent in Madrid. A caller, who refused to identify himself, told the correspondent that a government photographer had been assigned at the time to document the operation.The caller did not say how he had come to possess the photos or why he had decided to make them public now. But their publication comes at a time when Mexicans are intensely engaged in a national search for the truth about the most brutal abuses of power in their recent history.One photograph shows lines of young men stripped to their underwear and standing against a wall while guarded by heavily armed soldiers. In another, a grinning soldier stands between two half-naked men. One of the prisoners, thin and sweaty, has so much blood running from his mouth that it stains his underwear.''These photos prove once and for all that our version of the truth is the truth,'' said Luis González de Alba, a journalist who was a leader of the 1968 rally. ''They show the power of images over words.''Mr. González was one of the students who appeared in the Proceso photographs, standing without a shirt next to the soldier with the smirk. He acknowledged that he did not recall the moment the photograph was taken or when his clothes were ripped off.There were moments, he said, when his mind lapsed into a kind of out-of-body view in which he felt more in tune with things that were happening to others.He recalled the sight of plainclothes gunmen firing into the crowd of several thousand students from atop the buildings around the plaza. He recalled shouts for help from the wounded. He recalled the blood running down from the mouth of a student who stood next to him.Prodded for a memory of his own experience in a telephone interview from his home in Guadalajara, Mr. González told a story about the pants he was wearing in the Proceso photograph.The pants were not his, he recalled. A soldier, playing the role of ''good cop,'' saw him standing naked and ordered subordinates to find him  a pair of pants.''I think they were taken off the body of a dead man,'' Mr. González said.Mexican officials, including two former presidents, flatly denied accusations of brutality and misconduct by Mexican forces. But students and journalists who had come to Mexico from around the world for the 1968 Olympic Games reported being searched and detained not only by soldiers but also by the plainclothes gunmen of the Olympia Battalion, whose role has remained shrouded in classified documents.Sketchy details about the battalion indicate that it was formed as an antiterrorism force for the Mexico City Olympics in 1968, a time of great ferment for student movements around the world.For months before the Games,  Mexico's students had squared off against their country's authoritarian government. In an attempt to quash the movement, soldiers set up patrols at the National Autonomous University, and the students at Tlatelolco had rallied to express their outrage when the clash with the security forces ensued.Hundreds of the students arrested that night were released on condition that they leave the country. Others later joined small but scrappy guerrilla movements that sought to overthrow the government.Flickering demands for the truth about past government abuses and what is called the Tlatelolco massacre turned into a firestorm last year when Mexicans ended the 71-year-rule of the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, by electing Vicente Fox as president. Mr. Fox, a leader of the conservative National Action Party, promised to form a truth commission to investigate charges of past abuses.The president has since backed away from that promise under pressure from the P.R.I. and warnings from members of his own cabinet. The Institutional Revolutionary Party ruled the country during the events of 1968 and still holds significant power in Congress.In recent weeks, however, intense questioning at home and abroad about Mr. Fox's commitment to human rights pushed the president to offer some progress on prominent  cases.Two weeks ago, the government's human rights commission acknowledged for the first time that 275 people -- some of them former students from the Tlatelolco rally --  disappeared after being detained by security forces in the ''dirty war'' of the 1970's.President Fox has said that he will  appoint a special prosecutor to investigate the disappearances and other recent incidents of abuse -- a compromise to public calls for a truth commission.In addition, Congress recently approved a presidential initiative to reform the Constitution to clear the way for Mexico's plans to join the International Criminal Court, formed under the Rome Treaty of the United Nations.President Fox has not made any statements about the photographs published in Proceso. An assistant in the office of former President Luis Echeverría said he was out of the country and unable to respond to telephone calls. In 1968, Mr. Echeverría was interior minister under President Gustavo Díaz Ordaz and controlled intelligence operations and special security forces.Former student leaders of 1968 are hopeful that Mr. Fox's commitment to seeking justice for past abuses may ultimately lead to punishment for those responsible.''The Mexican government practiced dirty war in a way that is very similar to what happened in South America, but there were no military coups here,'' said Raúl Álvarez  Garín, a former student leader who organized the 1968 rally. ''The government acted under the guise of democracy.''''It is a practice that has to be rooted out at the core,'' Mr. Álvarez  said of the abuses, ''and that means punishing the intellectual authors of these crimes, starting with those at the very top levels of government.''