https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/19/us/baton-rouge-gunman-gavin-long.html
Baton Rouge Gunman Moved ‘Tactically’ to Target Police Officers, Officials Say - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Dallas  Tex  Shooting of Police Officers (2016),Attacks on Police,Long  Gavin Eugene (1987-2016),Baton Rouge (La)
July 18, 2016
2244
The black-clad man in Baton Rouge, La., barely bothered to conceal that he was heavily armed and looking for trouble, rounding corners in a ready-to-fire-stance, pointing a military-style weapon and prompting a 911 call of “a dude with a rifle,” behaving ominously. He ignored the easiest prey, the scores of civilians around him, hunting only people in uniform — methodically, mercilessly, even as they lay wounded on the pavement.Over the course of just a few chaotic minutes on Sunday morning, Gavin Long, acting alone and apparently calling on his military training, ran from building to building, turning a busy commercial street in Baton Rouge into a battleground stretching some 400 yards. In a scene that officials described in detail for the first time at a news conference on Monday, after piecing it together from multiple video recordings and witness accounts, Mr. Long, 29, killed three law enforcement officers and wounded several others before a police sniper fatally shot him.Col. Michael D. Edmonson, the superintendent of the Louisiana State Police, several times described the gunman as “moving tactically” from place to place, looking for targets and choosing vantage points. Watching the videos, he said, “is chilling in the sheer brutality of the shooter.”The videos show that at least twice before the shooting began, Mr. Long tried to approach an officer but failed, the officer apparently leaving the scene without knowing the lethal danger he was in, officials said. And they captured moments of heroism, including a sheriff’s deputy running to try to help a fallen officer and being killed.“They ran towards danger in order to protect the public. They ran towards danger in order to render aid to fellow officers,” an emotional Gov. John Bel Edwards said. “This was a diabolical attack on the very fabric of society, and that is not hyperbole. That is not an overstatement.”Investigators remain unsure of Mr. Long’s precise motives, why he chose Baton Rouge or when he formulated his plan, the officials said, but the timing raised obvious possibilities. The previous 12 days had included the killing of an African-American man by Baton Rouge officers and the fatal shooting of another black man by an officer near St. Paul, setting off nationwide protests. At one of the demonstrations, in Dallas,  five police officers were killed by a black man who the police said had specifically wanted to kill white officers.The police in Baton Rouge said last week that they were looking into a possible plot to kill police officers, news that helped keep the city on edge, but so far, officials said, they have found no link between that plan and Mr. Long.What was clear, they said, was that Mr. Long, a black Marine Corps veteran who drove into town a few days earlier in a Chevrolet Malibu he had rented in Missouri, wanted to kill law enforcement officers. And in doing so, he deepened pain, anger and suspicion that were already carving deep divisions within the country.Before 9 a.m. on Sunday, Mr. Long drove up Airline Highway, a six-lane road lined with strip malls, big-box stores and car dealers, headed north — the direction of the Baton Rouge Police Department headquarters, less than a mile away. Whether it was his first pass or he had been circling, looking for opportunities, is unclear.A Baton Rouge patrol car sat next to a Mobil station and B-Quik convenience store, and the gunman pulled off the road one building away, beside the Hair Crown Beauty Supply store. Colonel Edmonson said Mr. Long got out of his car, crept along the front of the store and approached the police car with his gun drawn — but there was no one in the vehicle.He went back to his own car and kept driving and, just past the gas station, spotted another officer vacuuming out a patrol car at Benny’s Car Wash. Just past the carwash, Mr. Long pulled into the driveway of Fitness Expo, an exercise equipment store, and parked behind it. He approached the carwash, but by then, the officer using the vacuum had driven off, Colonel Edmonson said.From then on, officials said, the gunman remained on foot, carrying an Israeli-made IWI Tavor assault rifle and a Springfield XD semiautomatic pistol, and leaving another assault rifle behind in his car, a Stag Arms civilian variant of the M4 carbines used by the American military. He ran behind several buildings, working his way south, back to where he had pulled over the first time.By then, officers had started arriving in response to the 911 call. Mr. Long found three Baton Rouge officers standing on a driveway next to the beauty supply store and shot them all, one fatally. One of the wounded officers dragged himself around a corner, into a parking lot behind the building, and the gunman followed to finish him off.A sheriff’s deputy, Brad Garafola, was in that parking lot and had taken shelter behind a Dumpster when he heard the shooting, but when he saw the wounded officer, he ran out to help. When the gunman rounded the corner, he and the deputy fired at each other repeatedly, and Mr. Long killed both the deputy and the wounded officer.“My deputy went down fighting,” said Sheriff Sid J. Gautreaux III of East Baton Rouge Parish. “He returned fire to the very end. He was laying in a prone position returning fire. You can actually see on the video the bullets hitting the concrete around him.”Officials did not say which officer died on the driveway and which one in the parking lot, but the two Baton Rouge officers killed were identified as Montrell L. Jackson and Matthew Gerald.“I heard the shots, then I saw cops flying everywhere, gunshots everywhere, then a lot of cops came in and swarmed the scene,” said Ashslia Jolivette, a cashier at a nearby convenience store who had stepped outside for a smoke when the gunfire began.After that shootout, Mr. Long retraced his steps, running behind the buildings back to the parking lot where he had left his car. There, Cpl. Nick Tullier of the Sheriff’s Department was sitting in his car, sending in information about the Malibu, and Mr. Long fired on him.“He was shot in the head and the stomach and has extensive damage,” Sheriff Gautreaux said. He is in critical condition, and “there’s a machine helping him breathe.”The attacker also shot Sgt. Bruce Simmons of the Sheriff’s Department, who was on foot farther away, shattering a bone in his upper arm. “He is going to his second surgery this evening; it will be one of many,” the sheriff said.Mr. Long was still moving toward the two wounded deputies, and no doubt would have killed them both, officials said, when a Baton Rouge SWAT team sniper shot him dead from more than 100 yards away.Carl Dabadie Jr., the Baton Rouge police chief, said the shootings justified the police’s response to recent demonstrations that had been criticized as heavy-handed.“We are up against a force that is not playing by the rules,” he said.