http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/11/fashion/affairs-of-the-wrist-the-apple-watch-comes-between-them.html
Affairs of the Wrist: The Apple Watch Comes Between Them - The New York Times
Wearable Computing,Apple Inc,Fashion and Apparel,Apple watch
June 11, 2015
9336
Is the Apple Watch just for gadget geeks? Farhad Manjoo, our technology columnist, “fell hard” for the watch back in April. But our fashion director, Vanessa Friedman, didn’t feel the sparks; she went public this week with her Apple Watch breakup. The two talked — over email, of course — about their wearable-tech turn-ons and turnoffs. Farhad composed his letters on his 5K iMac, watch on wrist. Vanessa replied from her MacBook Air, her wrist newly bare.I’m very sorry to hear about your breakup. But honestly, I’m not surprised. The relationship had always seemed a little fraught — as if you were both trying too hard to be something you were not, just for the sake of appearances. Now that it’s all over and you can honestly assess what went wrong, it sounds as if you’ve correctly diagnosed the problem: Despite its grand promises, the Apple Watch was really not meant for you, an admitted “nontech person” who isn’t into gadgets.In fact, I tried to warn you! Though I was mainly positive in my initial review of the device, I did note that the watch was unusual for an Apple product in not offering many benefits to nontechies. After wearing it almost daily for a couple of months now, I haven’t changed my feelings for the watch much. I continue to like it, and I miss it a little when I don’t put it on. But it still feels as if it’s not for most people. The Apple Watch is best suited for the niche category of early adopters like myself: addled techies who will buy anything new just because it holds out the promise of some marginal advantage in navigating life’s least-challenging obstacles, like helping you pay for stuff or giving you a half-second edge in seeing what’s next on your calendar.As you note, the trouble comes in the disconnect between Apple’s marketing and the watch’s reality. Apple has worked hard to go after fashion folks, people in the industry you cover. If a lot of those people are more like you than like me — if they, too, aren’t addicted to tech and don’t have trouble turning away from email and Twitter (I don’t know how you do it) — then perhaps the scales will soon fall from their eyes as well.Still, I would add one note of optimism for nontechies like yourself: You should think of this as so long, not goodbye. One thing Apple does well is quickly expand the capabilities of its new devices. At its developer conference this week, Apple outlined a series of improvements to the watch that will make apps faster and more useful. I expect continuing advancements in the coming years. I don’t know quite how yet, but the watch you find useless today may soon become truly useful.I’d also add that the long-term trends are in Apple’s favor here. When it comes to fashion, Apple is betting that there are enough people in the world like the fashionistas you cover — people who will pay for design and logos, who don’t mind being identified by products that define them. And with tech intruding upon every facet of our lives, there will be many more folks like me, folks who can’t get away from it for one second.In other words, for the Apple Watch, there are not only other fish in the sea — but the sea is actually expanding.Yours in sadness,FarhadI should always come to you for relationship advice. Maybe you were an Agony Aunt in another life.And I accept your point that this may be a recidivist relationship. I don’t see our separation as an irrevocable decision. I may approach the Apple Store in great humility in a few iterations, begging it to take me back.Of course, I did read your review before the watch and I hooked up. But the Apple folks were flirting so hard (and convincingly), I thought maybe I could change. After all, I don’t dislike technology — I find it quite liberating. It’s just that I don’t identify with it.As you say, the problem was in the gap between what was dangled — the “most personal product yet,” sold at elite fashion boutiques everywhere and introduced during fashion week — and what was in reality a product that seemed more about Apple than about me. There’s no question a lot of fashion people love a brand, but the brand has to be shorthand for their values — and the object needs to either be indispensable, or to pluck at their heartstrings.If you don’t need it — and I don’t think, as you point out, anyone needs this watch yet — you have to want it. Viscerally. And I just never felt that sucker punch of desire when I saw the Apple Watch. More an itchy sort of curiosity.(And there are also a host of fashion people who love a hidden brand, among whom I would include a lot of watch connoisseurs.)Not to get too racy, but maybe the answer for now is a threesome? Me, Apple and my old watch?And on another note, do you agree with one of the suggestions I’ve heard that this may get more nonwatch-wearing teenagers back in the habit, and hence be good for the traditional watch industry? Because I have my doubts. In fact, I wonder if the wrist is really the future of wearables at all.But I’m getting off topic. It’s all those fish in the sea!Best,VanessaWow, really didn’t anticipate us broaching threesomes here. But since you asked. … No, I don’t really think that would work; at least not for me. Like most threesomes (I’ve heard), I suspect it would be super-awkward. At first, you wouldn’t really know which one to pay attention to, and after a bit, you’d realize you vastly preferred the look and feel of one over the other, and then the less-preferred one would feel left out. The whole thing sounds like a recipe for trouble. By the way, I’m still talking about watches.As for teenagers, let me take a stab at that, because at least when it comes to watches, I act just like one. I haven’t ever regularly worn a wristwatch. I never saw much use for them. In school, there were always clocks around me, and when I got to college and adulthood, cellphones and P.D.A.s arrived, all bearing clocks.Perhaps my unfamiliarity with watches accounts for my interest in the Apple Watch. Among my favorite things about it is having the time right there! It sure is convenient to not have to go hunting for my phone to figure out the time of day. And because I don’t have anything to compare it to, it doesn’t really bother me that the screen only engages when I tilt my wrist toward my face, Dick Tracy style. I’m not used to looking at the time on my wrist while my hands are idle.I know I sound like a rube, but I suspect this is how most teenagers and other nonwatch-wearers will encounter this gadget: genuinely amazed at a device that tells time rather than bummed that it isn’t always on, like a Timex.Now, after being introduced to the wonders of wrist-worn clocks, will we be more willing to try out analog watches? I kind of doubt it. I feel as if, after wearing this thing, I wouldn’t want to wear a device that did less. I don’t think the Apple Watch does too much for me, but it does enough — and if it did any less, it would be useless. In addition to learning the time, I use it a great deal to find my phone (you tap a button, it gets your phone ringing — so handy!) and to peruse my coming calendar entries. An analog wouldn’t do that for me, so I wouldn’t bother with it.But enough about me. What’s your next step in the breakup: Are you going to return your watch to Apple, or just pass it off to a friend? I have another friend who sold his for a profit on eBay. That would be a sweet way to end a relationship.Best,FarhadO.K., I have reined in my attempt to do “50 Shades of Apple Watch.” But I still think there’s something to the polygamist approach. The high-end watch and the smartwatch fulfill different functions — arrival and insiderness versus broadly accessible techiness — and despite what you say about split attention, I actually can imagine them coexisting in a watch wardrobe (yes, that’s what we call it) pretty happily. You wouldn’t want your Apple Watch and your Seiko or your Swatch, but your Apple Watch and a Patek Philippe, for those who can afford one? Why not?Why should we expect one gadget to be all things to all people? Even if that is the dream of Apple.(Is that the dream of Apple? You know these things better than I do.)Here’s my horological dream, though, and it has to do with solving a real problem I have: One area where a phone is not acceptable, and where you couldn’t check the time on it even if you could find it in your pockets, is a cocktail party or black-tie event. It’s the only time I can think of that having an old-fashioned watch still helps — and why evening watches are one of the areas of old-fashioned watchmaking that is growing.But I also admit that more useful than said old-fashioned watch would be an elegant accessory on my wrist that would alert me to an important call, text or email. It would give me enormous peace of mind without causing concern that I am offending my companions or colleagues with obvious phone-checking maneuvers. Yet not even the gold version of the current Apple Watch would look right with a party dress, at least not on me.Maybe they could tackle that in generation next? Then I’d definitely be back.In the meantime, my watch is going back to Apple. I do have a friend, however, who just emailed me to tell me that he excitedly got his watch on Day 1 of deliveries, only to get so annoyed by the constant need to charge it, wake it up and calibrate the buzzing, that he sold it on Craigslist for a big profit.Do you think it’s already a collectible?Best,VI suspect your horological dream is in line with Apple’s. The people there don’t like to talk about the future of their products, so I haven’t asked them to describe what they’re trying to build. But if other Apple gadgets are any indication, you can bet this one will get lighter, thinner and sleeker over the next few years. At some point, it won’t look odd at a cocktail party.And if it takes off, I suspect norms will also change. Not long ago, it wasn’t really socially acceptable to look at your phone all the time. Now, black-tie events aside, it’s sort of required.As for whether it becomes a collectible: nope, I doubt it, unless it fails spectacularly. If the watch succeeds, I bet the first-gen versions will one day be seen as interesting curiosities. Maybe in 10 years, when smartwatches will be capable of actually changing time, some tech billionaire will pay $50,000 for a vintage 2015 model as part of a charity auction. But most of the rest of them will be forgotten in drawers. Yours, sadly, will probably get buffed up and sold as a refurb — and maybe, finally, it will find love.And now, my watch beckons.Best,Farhad