https://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/23/us/cleveland-police-officer-wounds-boy-12-in-shooting.html
Boy, 12, Shot and Wounded by Cleveland Police Officer - The New York Times
Cleveland (Ohio),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Rice  Tamir E (2002-14)
Nov. 22, 2014
7271
A Cleveland police officer shot and wounded a 12-year-old boy who was carrying what turned out to be a fake pistol outside a recreation center on Saturday after witnesses said the boy had brandished the gun on a playground, the authorities said.Two police officers responded to the scene and ordered the boy to raise his hands, but he refused and reached for a gun in his waistband, the Cleveland Division of Police said in a statement.An officer fired two shots, striking the boy once in the abdomen, police and emergency medical services officials said. He was taken to a hospital in serious condition and underwent surgery. His mother told a local news station that her son’s condition had deteriorated to critical on Saturday night.At an evening press conference, Deputy Chief Ed Tomba of the Cleveland police said the boy did not threaten the officers or point the weapon at them. "There was no verbal or no confrontation,” he said.The police learned that the gun was fake after the shooting, said Jennifer Ciaccia, a spokeswoman for the Division of Police. Investigators recovered a replica gun resembling a semiautomatic pistol, the police said. “It looks really, really real, and it’s huge,” Ms. Ciaccia said.Following protocol, both police officers involved in the shooting were placed on administrative leave during the investigation, the police said.The police said one of the officers had been treated for an ankle injury.The shooting happened around 3:30 p.m. at the Cudell Recreation Center on the city’s west side. Witnesses said that the boy had waved a gun and pointed it at people on the playground, according to the police.In a telephone interview with 19 Action News from MetroHealth Medical Center, the boy’s mother, Samaria Rice, said her son had gone to the recreation center with his friends and older sister, who told her that her son had been shot. She said the family lived across the street.A woman who answered the phone at the recreation center on Saturday said it was closed and referred further questions to the police.The shooting fell within a 24-hour period in which seven people were killed by gunfire on Cleveland’s east side.Early Saturday morning, the police found two men dead from gunshot wounds in a car that had crashed into a fence.On Friday evening, five people, including a pregnant woman and her unborn son, were killed in an execution-style shooting at a home in the Glenville neighborhood, the police said. The woman’s 9-year-old daughter was wounded in the shooting and taken to a local hospital for treatment.No arrests have been made in those shootings.