https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/08/books/review/everything-everything-by-nicola-yoon.html
‘Everything, Everything,’ by Nicola Yoon - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Yoon  Nicola (Author),Yoon  David (Illustrator),Everything  Everything (Book)
Nov. 6, 2015
9520
Even if you knew love could kill you, what would you risk to experience it — just once? Just for a little while?The world outside the home of 18-year-old Madeline Whittier, the heroine of Nicola Yoon’s gorgeous and lyrical debut novel, is filled with threats: viruses, allergens, bacteria, deadly airborne particles. These are all things that Madeline’s compromised immune system can’t handle. She has SCID, or severe combined immunodeficiency, known as “bubble baby disease.” So Madeline is a princess trapped in a castle — except her castle is a spotless, decontaminated house in Los Angeles with white walls, where she lives with her mother, a physician. She hasn’t left the house for 17 years. In order for people to visit (and they don’t; besides her nurse, Carla, Madeline’s only friends are virtual), they would have to endure a thorough physical and spend an hour in a decontamination airlock.For a teenager who has never felt sunshine on her face or her bare feet on the grass — and for whom the future holds none of that — Madeline is remarkably grounded. She inhales novels instead of fresh air, has online tutors (“If I were going to be something when I grew up, an architect is what I’d be”), and spends evenings playing games with her mother. “I am not lonely,” she tells her mom. “I am alone. Those are different things.”The possibilities of love and loss aren’t an option for her. She’s never weighed the heart-opening adrenaline rush of connection and newfound intimacy against the potential agony of heartbreak and rejection. Until the rumble and steady beep of a moving truck are heard next door, and suddenly, there’s a boy to marvel over: a boy who wears all black, practices parkour as if he’s weightless and has a window that looks directly onto Madeline’s.From what Madeline can surmise through her window, Oliver — Olly — spends his days hanging out on his roof and shielding his mother and younger sister from his alcoholic, abusive father. After nights of impressively detailed analog window communication — hand gestures, nods, smiles, an elaborate skit — email addresses are exchanged, and the 21st-­century courtship begins. There are hours of instant messaging, inboxes full of emails, and then, finally, a secret rendezvous, post-Olly’s checkup, set up by Carla. For someone who has never had a relationship, much less an IRL friendship with someone her own age, Madeline plays it extremely cool. Somehow she has the self-discipline to wait days before checking her email after seeing him, a feat a mature adult would not be able to accomplish — even though she’s crazy with longing: “Wanting just leads to more wanting,” she says. “There’s no end to desire.”Don’t worry, Carla tells Madeline. Love can’t kill you. “Just because you can’t experience everything doesn’t mean you shouldn’t experience anything,” Carla says. “Besides, doomed love is a part of life.” And Madeline and Olly are doomed. “What would happen if you went outside?” Olly asks. Her head would explode, Madeline says. Or her lungs. Or her heart.But when she sees Olly’s father in a violent, drunken rage, she can’t help it: She runs out the front door, determined to protect Olly — and exposes their relationship to her mother. Carla is promptly fired. And within days, Madeline has taken the biggest risk of her life, even bigger than letting herself fall in love with Olly.There’s some thematic overlap with Stephenie Meyer’s Twilight series (intimacy equals death) and, of course, with John Green’s “The Fault in Our Stars” (love in the context of terminal teenage illness). But with offbeat, pragmatic and sweetly romantic characters and an unconventional narrative style — the text is punctuated with medical charts, kissing primers, and other illustrations from Yoon’s husband, David Yoon — “Everything, Everything” tells us something we will always need to hear, no matter our age: that it’s not the risks of love or heartbreak that might end us. It’s the fear of the pain we might experience along the way that keeps us trapped in our cocoons — or our white, decontaminated houses. (And in the one major plot twist that doesn’t quite work, Madeline’s mother is trapped by fear as well: Her love for her daughter turns out to be darker than we expect.) Madeline might think she has only a few days with Olly before her body gives out — and whether that’s true is left to the reader — but she’ll take it.