https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/30/opinion/chinas-crackdown-on-lawyers-and-rights.html
China’s Crackdown on Lawyers and Rights - The New York Times
Editorials,China,Legal Profession,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Xi Jinping,Communist Party of China,Beijing Fengrui Law Firm,Political Prisoners
July 30, 2015
9772
Nine months ago, President Xi Jinping of China and the Communist Party he leads endorsed changes that were supposed to foster a more predictable legal system. State news media described the initiative as a means for “governing the country according to law.” The changes inspired some to hope for a tempering of the pervasive injustices.But a sweeping new government crackdown on lawyers demonstrates how far China is from any reasonable understanding, or practice, of the rule of law, which the country’s authoritarian leaders have long claimed to pursue. In recent weeks, more than 200 lawyers and associates have been detained in what some call the most serious assault on lawyers in decades.While the government has accused the lawyers of exploiting legal cases to enrich themselves and subverting the party, the crackdown is undoubtedly intended to crush the “rights defense” movement, which aims to defend the rights of individuals in a legal system rife with corruption and abuse.A major target of the crackdown has been the Fengrui Law Firm in Beijing, which has represented the dissident artist Ai Weiwei; Ilham Tohti, a Uighur academic sentenced to life in prison last year; and Cao Shunli, a human rights campaigner who died while in police custody last year.The assault on lawyers comes against a backdrop of ever tightening government control under Mr. Xi. This month, for example, China enacted a national security law that will be used to further harden the party’s unquestioned rule.And yet the number of Chinese lawyers willing to risk their lives and freedom to take on politically sensitive cases has grown, and the concept of public interest law has begun to take hold in the areas of labor and the environment as well as criminal justice and human rights.This may be a result of more Chinese lawyers being trained abroad, including in the United States. “They want to elevate their status from functionaries to professionals,” says Michael Posner, the assistant secretary of state for democracy, human rights and labor from 2009 to 2013. “There clearly is a big appetite among many in the rapidly growing legal profession in China to be part of the larger legal world.”Thirteen former heads of the Hong Kong Bar Association have started a petition calling on Beijing to halt the “unlawful or arbitrary” persecution of the lawyers. Human rights experts at the United Nations have also condemned the crackdown.Mr. Xi seems to think it’s possible to focus China on economic reform only, while keeping a tight grip on lawyers, activists and others who want to liberalize the political environment. But international businesses generally prefer investing in countries that offer stability and predictability made possible by the rule of law.In China’s case, they have often been willing to ignore the widespread corruption and a largely dysfunctional legal system because the potential economic gains were enormous. With the collapse of China’s stock market, slowing growth and rising wages, that calculus may shift as places like Vietnam and even Myanmar look more attractive.At some point, China’s leaders are going to have to modernize and institute a fairer, more predictable legal system in line with international norms if they want their country to grow and credibly lead the world.