http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/23/world/asia/gunmen-kidnap-tourists-in-philippines.html
4 Kidnapped From Resort in Southern Philippines - The New York Times
Kidnapping and Hostages,Terrorism,Philippines,Mindanao (Philippines),Norway,Canada
Sept. 22, 2015
8156
MANILA — A group of 11 men posing as tourists kidnapped four people from a Philippine island resort on Monday, a military spokesman said on Tuesday.The victims were identified as Robert Hall and John Ridsdel, both of Canada, and Kjartan Sekkingstad, of Norway, said the spokesman, Capt. Alberto Caber. The identity of the fourth victim, a woman from the Philippines, has not yet been confirmed, he said.The four were taken from the Holiday Oceanview Samal resort on Samal Island, off the southern coast of Mindanao, about 11:30 p.m. on Monday, Captain Caber said. Some of the kidnappers were armed with pistols, he said. Closed-circuit camera footage shows the men casually speaking in English to the victims before the abduction. Two Japanese guests at the resort tried unsuccessfully to intervene, but they were not harmed or abducted, Captain Caber said.Though many parts of the southern Philippines have high levels of violence and lawlessness, the location of the resort, near the city of Davao, is considered relatively safe, Captain Caber said.Officials did not release background information on the victims, but photographs released by the military indicate that Mr. Ridsdel is a mining executive based in the Philippines since at least August 2008.Mr. Sekkingstad is the manager of the resort.Mindanao has been a frequent site of kidnappings and violence between government troops and several rebel groups, including Muslim extremists who have pledged allegiance to the Islamic State.“There are many lawless elements in Mindanao, but it’s not clear which group is involved,” Captain Caber said.The kidnapping on Monday was the first abduction of Westerners in Mindanao in more than two years. In 2012, a Swiss national, Lorenzo Vinciguerra, and Ewold Horn, from the Netherlands, were abducted while bird-watching off the coast. Mr. Vinciguerra escaped in December. Mr. Horn is still being held.Matt Williams, country director in the Philippines for Pacific Strategies & Assessments, a risk-management and security firm, said Westerners in Mindanao had rarely been targeted for abduction in recent years, partly because of warnings by foreign governments to avoid the area, as well as heightened efforts by the Philippine security forces.“The majority of kidnappings in the Philippines are committed by criminal organizations and not by terrorist or insurgent groups,” Mr. Williams said. “It is a cash-and-carry business in the Philippines.”