https://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/20/opinion/from-tony-soprano-to-chris-christie.html
From Tony Soprano to Chris Christie - The New York Times
Gandolfini  James,The Sopranos (TV Program),New Jersey,Christie  Christopher J,Economic Conditions and Trends
June 20, 2013
9226
MONTCLAIR, N.J. — THE first time I saw James Gandolfini on the screen, as the comically pathetic heavy called “Bear” in the film “Get Shorty,” I felt a flash of recognition. There was something familiar about the weakness and vulnerability he carried with him beneath his bullying, macho airs. The hurt in his eyes hurt me to look at it. I later learned that we had grown up at the same time not far from each other in suburban Bergen County, N.J. On summer afternoons in the 1960s, my mother used to drop a friend and me off at the movie theater in Westwood, Mr. Gandolfini’s birthplace.By the time he had established himself as Tony Soprano, a small-time gangster of mythic proportions, I knew it was Jersey speaking to me through the magnetic torment of his persona. Above all else, Mr. Gandolfini helped America understand Jersey, and Jersey understand itself.There is a poignant fatality about big, blustery men who try to hide a faltering interior, just as there is touching comedy in the fact that New Jersey legislators added the sobriquet “Garden State” to our license plates in 1954, hoping to hide the bad odor of the state’s reputation as a dumping ground for garbage from other states. Dreams deferred and defeated characterize so much of the Jersey atmosphere, from Bruce Springsteen’s ambitious desperados dancing in the dark to Snooki’s manic flights of desperate ambition. Mr. Gandolfini’s physical bulk made Tony’s arrested will only more riveting, for all his brutality.As all great artists do, Mr. Gandolfini created in Tony Soprano a particularity with a universal resonance. The native New Jersey actor imbued the native New Jersey fictional character with his own immediate experience, and then — in vaulting Jersey style — leapt in his performances toward the very heart of our time.One could even argue that Gandolfini/Soprano ushered in the latest era of New Jersey politics. Without Mr. Gandolfini’s six-season tour de force as Tony Soprano, I don’t think the state would have been ready for big, blustery Chris Christie.As district attorney, he came across as too darn mean, a dream-trampling Manhattan A-type, not a bowed-but-unbroken Garden State underdog. But Mr. Gandolfini’s uncanny habitation of Tony provided the key to Mr. Christie’s character: schooled in Tony’s fears and insecurities, New Jerseyans could see the wary uncertainty in Mr. Christie’s eyes. Tutored by weak Tony’s crumbling largeness, we understood the wound beneath Mr. Christie’s potentially fatal bulk.Watching television images of the emotionally devastated Mr. Christie survey the Jersey Shore after it had been ravaged by Hurricane Sandy, you realized that the governor’s success lay in the Gandolfini-shaped perception that though he might bellow like a baritone, somewhere deep inside he wept like a soprano.Mr. Gandolfini also had a purchase on the American psyche far beyond the Garden State’s borders. The tremors that grew into full-scale convulsions in 2008 — class divisions, social anomie, economic panic — were already being felt, under the media radar, by many Americans around the time “The Sopranos” had its premiere on HBO in January 1999. The middle class was being assaulted from all sides by a changing economy, outsourced jobs, soaring prices. People began to grow more explicit in the pursuit of their self-interest. Employers broke the social contract with their employees. Employees had to scramble over their co-workers to keep their jobs.No wonder people were glued to Tony Soprano.They watched him, this monster with a tender side, in a trance of horrified recognition. As our social life became reduced to considerations of the bottom line, the violence and humiliation Tony wrought in the name of “just business” — to quote the famous line from “The Godfather,” a movie that haunts Tony’s imagination — spoke to Americans in upheaval. Here was a sociopath who now seemed like the guy next door, a Ward Cleaver for the 21st century.Alongside this prophetic aspect to Mr. Gandolfini’s portrayal of Tony, there was also a dimension that was powerfully nostalgic. During the show’s span, from 1999 to 2007, the Internet transformed social relations. In this world of cacophonous confession, Tony was like an LP among digitally embedded playlists.First on blogs, then on social media, people were encouraged to perform their privacy, to market their interiority. As a result, candor was not what it used to be. In the race to appear unique and appealing, we began to sound the same. Private expression, once on the marketplace, began to lose its authenticity.Pouring his heart out to his shrink — magnificently played by Lorraine Bracco — Tony was a throwback to a time when your deepest thoughts and feelings defined your uniqueness because you so rarely shared them with other people, who seldom confided theirs to you.Thanks to Mr. Gandolfini’s empathetic genius, Tony became an American creature teeming with an unmasterable inner life that could not be blogged, posted, updated or tweeted. Here, with unforgettable reality, was the whole human mess exposed by a person’s intimate self-disclosures — rather than concealed, as inner life often is now, by the very process of disclosing it.Mr. Gandolfini’s artistic triumph was to create an asphalt monster with a tender, suburban side, to conjure up a gangster whose exposure of his own brutality offered a relief from our moment of increasingly impersonal social relations.Only in New Jersey.