https://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/16/world/asia/16iht-exodus16.html
Unnerved by Radiation Talk, Some Leaving Tokyo - The New York Times
Japan Earthquake and Tsunami (2011),Japan,Tokyo (Japan),Radiation,Fukushima Daini Nuclear Power Plant (Japan),Kyoto (Japan)
March 15, 2011
5264
TOKYO — Some Tokyo residents have begun to leave the city amid fear that radiation from the badly damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant could affect the health of people in the Japanese capital.There is no generalized panic, but the news that radiation from the plant, about 275 kilometers, or 170 miles, north of Tokyo, was clearly enough to send some to perceived safety further south or out of the country altogether.“I’m a little scared,” Yuko Ota, 38, an office worker, said Tuesday as she stood in a long line at Meguro Station in central Tokyo for a ticket to Osaka, her hometown.“My company told me to go back now because they think the disaster will have an impact in Tokyo, and the earlier we go, the better,” she said. “So for one week, to begin with, the whole company is either staying home or going away. I’m lucky because I can go be with my parents.”Ben Applegate, 27, an American freelance translator, editor and tour guide, said he and his girlfriend, Winnie Chang, 28, of Taiwan, left Tokyo to stay with his former host family in the ancient capital of Kyoto.“I realize that everything is probably going to be fine,” he said, but the combination of a forecast for another major quake, which has since been revised downward, and the nuclear accident had been a strong incentive to leave.“Plus, our families were calling once every couple of hours,” he said. “So we thought everyone would feel better if we went to Kyoto.”Gemma Nokes, 32, a British recruitment consultant, said she had weighed the information and decided she wanted to get away for a few days.“I’m heading down to Nagoya with a friend,” she said, referring to Japan’s fourth-largest city. “It’s a precautionary measure.”She said she knew French and American people who had left for Singapore or Hong Kong to wait out the news.But for everyone who has left, many more are soberly carrying on.Typical was the reaction of a young Japanese man in a leather jacket waiting outside the station. Asked whether he was leaving because of the radiation danger, he shrugged and laughed, but declined to explain.Edmund Harbord, 30, and his friend Sam Illingworth, 27, both British physicists who live in Japan, said that as far as they were concerned, nothing had changed since Saturday, when the problems first became evident.“Japan’s government has been slow to get the news out, and the Western media are jumping to conclusions,” Mr. Harbord said.“We’re absolutely not panicking at all,” Mr. Illingworth said.At the Atre supermarket in Meguro, there were long lines as people stocked up on essentials, and store personnel were pressed to keep the shelves full.A manager, nervous to be seen talking with a reporter, said fear played a part in the long lines. She added, however, that the store had also been closed for a day because of the power outages, and some customers were probably just catching up.(A reporter’s digital exposure dosimeter showed no increase in radiation from normal background levels on an afternoon trip around the city.)The French and German governments have already urged their citizens to leave, while the British, U.S. and Chinese governments have cautioned against nonessential travel. American schools are on spring break, so it is hard to get a sense of what many Americans living in Tokyo are doing.“In the wider international community, there are lots of anecdotes and rumors” about people making plans to leave, said a Western diplomat. “And of course there’s concern.”Mark McDonald contributed reporting.