http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/27/science/27agre.html
Using a Leadership Role to Put a Human Face on Science - The New York Times
Science and Technology,Agre  Peter,American Association for the Advancement of Science
Jan. 26, 2009
1775
In February, the  Nobel Prize-winning biochemist Peter Agre, 60,  will be inducted as the 163rd president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the nation’s largest scientific organization. Dr. Agre is the director of the Malaria Research Institute at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. We spoke in January for two hours in a back room at the American Visionary Art Museum in Baltimore (the current exhibition is “The Marriage of Art, Science & Philosophy”) and also later on the telephone. An edited version of the conversations follows.Q. YOU WON THE 2003 NOBEL CHEMISTRY PRIZE FOR YOUR DISCOVERY OF AQUAPORINS. WHAT EXACTLY ARE THEY?A. The plumbing system for cells. Every cell in our body is primarily water. But the water doesn’t just sit in the cell, it moves through it in a very organized way. The process occurs rapidly in tissues that have these aquaporins or water channels.Until 1985, when my lab found the protein they are made of, aquaporins hadn’t yet been identified. There had been a controversy in biology for more than 100  years about how water moved through cells. The assumption was that it somehow leaked through the cell membrane. And indeed some water moves that way. But the very rapid movement of water through some cells was not explained by this theory.Q. HOW DID YOU MAKE THE DISCOVERY?A. By serendipity. We had an N.I.H. grant to study the Rh blood group antigen. We had developed a method to isolate the Rh molecule. And a second protein called 28K kept appearing in the tests. At first, we thought 28K was a piece of the Rh  molecule — some kind of breakdown product of the Rh,  a contaminant that showed during testing. But as we studied it further, 28K seemed to be an undiscovered molecule. No scientist had ever reported it before. But what did it do?As a part-time project on weekends, we pursued that question. We calculated 28K presence in different types of cells. This mysterious protein was enormously abundant in red blood cells and kidney tubes. And after we cloned and sequenced it, we found it to be related to a series of proteins of very diverse origins — like the brains of fruit flies, bacteria, the lenses of eyes, even plant tissues. Still: what was it?Then in 1991, I visited  John Parker. (He died in 1993.) He’d been my hematology professor at the University of North Carolina. He said, “Boy, this thing is found in red cells, kidney tubes, plant tissues; have you considered it might be the long-sought water channel?” It was his suggestion that caused me to change the direction of my research. What my lab team was able subsequently to prove was that 28K formed these little tubes inside many cells and that water passed through them. With that, more than 100  years of scientific controversy was ended.Q. WHY WAS IT IMPORTANT TO LEARN THIS?A. Because once the protein had been identified, you had the possibility of manipulating it. You had the possibility of solving such medical problems as fluid retention in heart disease, brain edema after a stroke, even dry eye syndrome. This hasn’t happened yet. But we’ve done the basic research.Q. WERE YOU SURPRISED TO WIN THE NOBEL PRIZE FOR THIS FINDING?A. There were some clues that this might happen. Like getting invited to Sweden to give lectures. But at 5:30 a.m. on an October morning, the phone rang. “Hello, Professor Agre, this is Stockholm. You have won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. In about 10 minutes we’re having a press conference and the whole world will hear — so you’d better get on with your day.” I sprinted into the shower, and my wife, Mary, called my mother, who said, “That’s very nice, but don’t let it go to his head.”Q. YOUR MOTHER SAID THAT?A. She’s a South Dakota farm girl — Lutheran. I told that story once to a Jewish colleague and he said, “My mother would have said, what took the Nobel Committee so long?”Q. ON A DIFFERENT TOPIC, YOU CONSIDERED RUNNING FOR SENATE FOR THE SAME MINNESOTA SEAT THAT AL FRANKEN IS FIGHTING FOR. WHY DIDN’T YOU GO FOR IT?A. Because it was a long shot, though it seemed winnable. Two years ago, the polls indicated that Norman Coleman, the Republican incumbent, would have trouble getting re-elected. I’m a lifelong Democrat and my party, at the time, didn’t have a candidate — though Franken was talking about running.I grew up in Minnesota. Four generations of my father’s people are buried there. So the first thing I did was talk to key Democrats in Minnesota. They were courteous, but not supportive. So what does a scientist do in a new area? They do a pilot experiment, which in politics is a called a poll. Our poll  said that if I got the nomination, I could win. I’d have to raise 10, 20  million dollars, though. Without the enthusiastic support of the party insiders, that seemed impossible.Q. RESEARCH AMERICA, THE WASHINGTON ADVOCACY GROUP, HAS BEEN TRYING TO GET SCIENTISTS TO RUN FOR OFFICE. IS THAT REALISTIC?A. Oh, it’s doable. But the Senate is a very lofty place to start at,  unless you’re prominent or extremely wealthy. There are other places for scientists to serve: school boards, town councils, state legislatures, even Congress. Bill Foster, a physicist at Fermilab, ran for Congress when Dennis Hastert gave up his seat. Leon Lederman (a Nobel Prize-winning physicist) organized a bunch of us to get out for Bill, and he won.During the Bush administration, you heard a lot of complaining about science policy. Staying in our laboratories wasn’t going to change that. One of the things I wanted to do from the Senate is put a human face on science. I can also do that this year as president of the A.A.A.S.Q. YOU’RE PART OF  A GROUP OF AMERICAN SCIENTISTS WHO WANT TO OPEN UP COMMUNICATION WITH NORTH KOREAN SCIENTISTS. WHAT CAN YOU SAY ABOUT THAT? A. There’s a team that’s attempting to organize scientific visits to North Korea. Even during the Cold War, when the governments of the U.S.S.R. and the U.S. were at odds, scientists kept in touch.I think particularly with North Korea now, there’s every reason that scientists should be part of the group that welcomes them back into the international community. We see this as an opening to do something like the cultural exchange that happened with the New York Philharmonic. So yes, we’re hoping to make a visit. But it’s still in the planning stages.