https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/26/business/dealbook/corporate-governance-looms-as-an-issue-for-nestle.html
Corporate Governance Looms as an Issue for Nestlé - The New York Times
Shareholder Rights and Activism,Nestle SA,Loeb  Daniel S,Kraft Heinz Company
June 26, 2017
7520
Nestlé’s biggest issue is its governance.The activist investor Third Point’s ideas for Nestlé, the Swiss maker of Kit Kat, range from setting new numerical targets to selling off divisions. They are sensible but nothing that other shareholders haven’t called for in the past. Shaking up the company’s slow-moving culture, starting with a new chairman, would achieve more.Third Point, led by the billionaire Daniel S. Loeb, disclosed on Sunday a $3.5 billion stake in Nestlé, or 1.3 percent of its share capital. Mr. Loeb wants to see a formal margin goal such as the ones recently unveiled by Unilever and Danone, a sale of Nestlé’s 23 percent stake in the French cosmetics giant L’Oreal and a tidying up of the company’s unruly portfolio.There are signs that Nestlé sees the need for a fresh approach. Ulf Mark Schneider became the company’s first external chief executive in decades when he took up the role in January, and he quickly scrapped the company’s long-held annual sales growth target of 5 to 6 percent in favor of a more realistic 2 to 4 percent for 2017. But his appointment goes only so far. Any changes he makes have to pass muster with his predecessor, Paul Bulcke, who will be chairman until 2018. Mr. Bulcke, a Nestlé employee since 1979, likewise reported to his predecessor during his stint as chief executive. Moving upstairs is an unhelpful Nestlé tradition.A new, external chairman would make it easier to put into effect some of the changes that Mr. Loeb is calling for. Certainly, there is scope to cut costs and achieve margin of 18 to 20 percent that Third Point reckons is doable by 2020. Nestlé’s gross margin — the difference between what it buys and sells — is higher than that of Kraft Heinz, yet a trading operating margin of 15.3 percent in 2016 was almost eight percentage points lower than its rival’s.Of the major European consumer giants, Nestlé has been the least forthcoming in laying out a convincing strategy for sales growth. Danone is betting on its $12.5 billion purchase of WhiteWave, a dairy-alternative producer, while Unilever has made over a dozen small acquisitions since 2014.Mr. Schneider has the potential to alter Nestlé for the better, but real change needs to start higher up.