https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/01/us/for-baltimore-rappers-killing-has-a-sickening-echo-of-freddie-gray.html
A Rapper’s Killing Puts Baltimore, Grief-Stricken and Angry, on Edge - The New York Times
Watson  Tyriece (Lor Scoota),Baltimore (Md),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Gray  Freddie (1989-2015),Rap and Hip-Hop,Music,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings
June 30, 2016
7303
BALTIMORE — When riots broke out last year over the death of Freddie Gray, a promising young hip-hop artist named Lor Scoota, who rapped about “selling scramble, coke and smack” yet ran a football team for inner-city children, made the rounds of local high schools at the invitation of a city councilman. He told students to get their diplomas and shared his dream of escape.Now, Lor Scoota, 23, born Tyriece Watson, is dead, gunned down Saturday night — the police say he was targeted — after leaving a “Pray for Peace” charity basketball game. On Thursday, hundreds of mourners packed the parking lot of a funeral home in West Baltimore for a raucous hip-hop vigil that concluded with a prayer for peace and a tribute to Mr. Watson’s music. His funeral, to be followed by a community repast, was to be held Friday, at the same church as Mr. Gray’s.And Baltimore is once again on edge and asking: Why?“You really tore up this city when people was trying to have hope,’’ Quiana Harris, a cousin of Mr. Watson’s, said in a tearful message to his killers.As massacres like the one in Orlando, Fla., grab headlines and lead to sit-ins on Capitol Hill, the killing of Mr. Watson is a sharp reminder of the numbing effects of daily gun violence in urban America. Baltimore had 344 homicides last year, almost as many as New York, which has more than 10 times its population.Baltimore is hardly the only city in crisis. Chicago is grappling with a vicious murder epidemic, and Milwaukee and New Orleans have had a spike in homicides.But the deaths of Mr. Gray and Mr. Watson — one involving police officers who have been charged with crimes but not convicted, the other unsolved even though there were witnesses — is generating a particular kind of angst and fury here.Baltimore has yet to make its mark on the national hip-hop scene; Lor Scoota — “Lor’’ is this city’s version of “Lil” — had a chance at that.”He wasn’t flashy, he was chill; he just wanted to put his city on the map,” said Donnell Wallace, 37, another cousin of Mr. Watson’s, who wore black and white bracelets bearing the rapper’s name. “That’s all he wanted to do, and it was taken from him.’’The Baltimore Police Department, excoriated for its handling of last year’s unrest, is treading a delicate path during what Commissioner Kevin Davis described, in an interview on Thursday, as a “miniature moment.” At a Monday night vigil, there were three arrests when mourners threw rocks and bottles at the police.The Rev. Jamal Bryant, a prominent minister here who is to deliver the eulogy at Mr. Watson’s funeral, called the police response “provocative and very unnecessary.”Commissioner Davis, who said only about a dozen of the 100 officers present were in riot gear, called his officers’ actions “proportionate” and noted that other vigils had been peaceful. But he said he must be prepared for that to change.“Emotions are running high,” the commissioner said.Baltimore is between two of the six trials in Mr. Gray’s death; Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr. was acquitted of murder last week, and pretrial motions are scheduled next week for Lt. Brian Rice.The killing of Mr. Watson is all the more painful because he held so much promise; his song “Bird Flu,” a riff on the city’s drug culture and its baseball team, the Orioles, had attracted attention outside Baltimore. Hip-hop artists in other cities have mourned him on Instagram; The Game, a well-known Los Angeles rapper, posted a photograph of the two of them together.Wesley Case, who covers pop music for The Baltimore Sun, said Mr. Watson had been trying to “explain the trauma of his city” in the best tradition of street rap, and had a singular ability to reach young people, which is why politicians like Nick J. Mosby, a city councilman, turned to him during last year’s unrest.The seeming lack of cooperation of witnesses, and the silence of black politicians who spoke out after Mr. Gray’s death, enrages Munir Bahar, whose anti-violence group, 300 Men March, has plastered the city with black and white signs that read “We Must Stop Killing Each Other.”“Where’s the professional men, where’s the black intellectuals, the educated folks who have degrees?” Mr. Bahar said. “How come you can’t fix your own damn community?”Outside Wylie Funeral Home here, young black men like Deontay Jones, a friend of Mr. Watson’s, shook their heads. “I worry about my life 24/7, because anything can happen at any time, you feel me?” Mr. Jones, 17, said.Commissioner Davis said the authorities had dozens of tips — a high number for Baltimore, which Mr. Bryant called “the headquarters of stop-snitching.” But so far, they lack even a motive. This much is known:Mr. Watson was leaving a basketball game at Morgan State University here, on Saturday around 7 p.m., in his car. He was at a stoplight at a busy intersection in northeast Baltimore when a green minivan pulled up behind him and made a three-point turn. A gunman then hopped out and fired a few shots, then jumped back in and sped off.“It was very cold and calculated,” Commissioner Davis said. “This isn’t the killer’s first time, probably, killing somebody.”Like many young African-American men in Baltimore, Mr. Watson had a criminal past. He had been arrested on drug and weapons charges, and in April 2015, about a week after Mr. Gray died, he was arrested at Baltimore-Washington International Airport for trying to take a loaded handgun through a security checkpoint.Whether that past is connected to his killing is unclear. Some say envy is to blame; they subscribe to what people here call the “crab bucket” theory: When a crab climbs its way out of a bucket, other crabs pull it back down.Whatever the motive, people here say that Lor Scoota seemed to be on the right path. A former teacher, Donald Davis, said the rapper had transformed himself from a ‘‘nasty’’ young man into a ‘‘perfect gentleman’’ when he was around 17, after a summer youth program.After he died, someone posted a YouTube video of him reading to children at a local elementary school. Though Mr. Bahar, the anti-violence activist, complained that Mr. Watson’s music “glorified the street life,” Mr. Watson boasted in a recent song that “I don’t put no guns in my video.’’Friends said he was just singing about what he knew.“This wasn’t about any drug deal,” said Marvin McKenstry, 40, a minister whose sister is Mr. Watson’s godmother. “He was far removed from that life, and music was his life. He was a guy that had a path cut out for him — it wasn’t like he was struggling on the fence. He wasn’t still messing around. He was done.”