http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/14/sports/swiss-move-to-reduce-stress-on-the-matterhorn.html
Swiss Move to Reduce Stress on the Matterhorn - The New York Times
Switzerland,Matterhorn (Switzerland),Alps Mountains,Zermatt (Switzerland),Mountains,Mountaineering,Mont Blanc
July 13, 2015
474
GENEVA — One hundred fifty years to the day after Switzerland’s most famous peak was first ascended, the 14,692-foot tall Matterhorn will be closed to climbers on Tuesday. The closure, the first in the mountain’s history, will pay homage to the peak’s inaugural ascent, in which four men perished, and to the nearly 600 people who have lost their lives on the mountain since it was first conquered in 1865.The closure is not just about remembering the past, though — the event is also a nod to a different kind of future for the Matterhorn, one that will see far fewer climbers on the craggy peak’s summit.Until this year, about 3,000 people climbed the Matterhorn annually, a majority of whom begin their summit bids from the Hörnli hut, a shelter at 10,695 feet that serves as a base camp for climbers headed to the peak. In years past, over 180 people might be climbing toward the mountain’s apex on a busy day during the prime climbing months of July, August and September.The crowds caused safety and environmental impact issues. Crowds slow travel on the mountain, increase the amount of rock fall, and significantly contribute to the mountain’s subjective hazards. For the past decade, about a dozen people have died each year on the mountain, and at one point in the early ’90s that number was up to 24 fatalities per year, according to Benedikt Perren, head of the Zermatt Mountain Guides Association, making the Matterhorn one of the most dangerous mountains in the world. Human waste from campers at the Hörnli hut was ruining the mountain’s water supply.“Before, everything was completely overheated. There was too much stress — stress on the mountain and on the guides,” Perren said of the Matterhorn’s crowds.The overcrowding prompted the Burgergemeinde Zermatt, the local community association that owns the hut, to re-envision the Matterhorn’s future. On Tuesday, the Burgergemeinde will officially unveil the refurbished Hörnli hut, the product of a two-year, $9 million project.Built with sustainability at its core, the new hut features solar power, an eco-friendly water and waste management system, and 130 beds, 40 fewer than the shelter had previously. Twenty of those beds will be reserved for hikers who have no intention of going to the mountain’s summit. Camping, which was once permitted on the hut’s periphery, will now be banned. The result will be about 500 to 1,000 fewer climbers on the peak’s summit per year and a reduced strain on the mountain’s resources.“I think this famous mountain, it has to be regulated. With less people, everything is better,” said Perren. “It’s safer. People have a better experience. It’s better for the guides, and it’s better for the mountain.”Overcrowding on the Alps’ most popular peaks in high season has long been an issue. Permits aren’t required to climb mountains in Europe, and guides and local authorities have struggled with how to regulate the crowds. Two years ago, the Goûter hut on Mont Blanc banned camping on its grounds in an effort to reduce numbers on the mountain, but the Hörnli hut is the first mountain shelter in Europe to limit beds.Crowds weren’t an issue on the Matterhorn when Edward Whymper, Francis Douglas, Charles Hudson, and Douglas Hadow, led by their guides Michel Croz and the father-son team of Peter Taugwalder Jr. and Sr., reached the summit of the Matterhorn on the afternoon of July 14, 1865, and became the first climbers to do so.The men then began their descent down the Hörnligrat, a narrow, mile-long ridge that drops over 3,000 feet on either side. About an hour into the descent, Hadow, an inexperienced climber wearing poor boots with no traction, slipped and fell, dragging the three climbers roped to him — Croz, Hudson, and Douglas — down the Matterhorn’s sheer north face to their deaths. As the men fell, the rope connecting Douglas and the elder Taugwalder broke, thereby saving the Taugwalders and Whymper, who were able to cling to the mountain.The accident catapulted the town of Zermatt from obscurity onto the global stage. Days after the accident, Queen Victoria tried to ban her British subjects from climbing the peak. “Everything that is forbidden becomes sexy, and more and more tourists came to Zermatt. They wanted to see the place where the accident happened. They wanted to go up. That’s how tourism in our region started,” said Perren.Throngs of tourists began descending on the valley, transforming the tiny farming village into a hub of international tourism and alpinism. According to Zermatt Tourism, 2,040 tourists visited the alpine hamlet in 1865. By 1900, that number had grown to 51,000. Today, nearly 2 million people visit Zermatt each year, and it is Switzerland’s most popular tourist destination.Over the years, Zermatt has changed — 70 ski lifts now dot its surrounding peaks, 130 hotels fill the village core, and tourism, not farming, is the community’s bedrock — but the allure of the Matterhorn is unwavering.The Matterhorn still draws climbers hoping to make their mark. In April, Dani Arnold, a Swiss mountaineer, broke the peak’s speed climbing record, ascending the Matterhorn’s treacherous north face in one hour 46 minutes. People have climbed the peak without ropes, summited in the dead of winter, and pioneered creative and challenging new routes, but for many mountaineers, it is the first ascent that still stands out as its finest.“The best in climbing is to do something that no one has done before. There’s zero information. That’s the purest style of climbing,” said Simon Anthamatten, a guide from Zermatt and the winner in 2009 of the Piolet d’Or, an award given annually to mountain climbers and considered one of the sport’s highest honors.“So for me, that first ascent of the Matterhorn is the most impressive because you come to Zermatt 150 years ago and you see this mountain, this perfect pyramid, and you know it hasn’t been climbed. As a climber, this is the ultimate dream.”