https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/28/us/politics/trump-golf-club-protests-senior-pga.html
Senior P.G.A. Championship, Held at Trump National Golf Club, Draws Protests - The New York Times
United States Politics and Government,PGA Championship,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Conflicts of Interest,Trump National Golf Club,Trump  Donald J,Virginia,Golf
May 28, 2017
4232
STERLING, Va. — The usual atmospherics of a golf tournament were all there: quiet claps and distant roars, the metallic clink of a well-hit drive, hushed voices suited to a library.But there was also an unusual sight on Sunday for the final round of a major golf championship: protesters who gathered near the course on land and water, objecting to what they see as conflicts of interest between President Trump’s business interests and his duties in office.The activists descended on the area around Trump National Golf Club here in the Washington suburbs, holding placards on a street corner and shouting outside the tournament gates, as the club hosted the Senior P.G.A. Championship. Self-proclaimed “kayaktivists” took to the water with signs that read “Moscow on the Potomac” and “Trumpty is an unplayable lie,” slowly skirting the fairways where dozens of fans had lined up to watch the golfer John Daly, a supporter of Mr. Trump’s.“Trump is using the seat of the presidency to line his own pockets,” said Candy Baracat-Donovan as she walked the edge of the course with the water protesters. Ms. Baracat-Donovan is part of a Virginia-based group called Politically Connect that helped organize the protest.“His family is directly benefiting from the dollars that are brought in here,” she said.As president, Mr. Trump has brought public attention to his family-owned golf clubs by visiting them regularly, including six visits to the Virginia course while the P.G.A. promoted tickets to this event. The Trumps purchased the course in 2009 from a local bank and have invested at least $25 million in renovations. The president’s golf clubs and resorts have accounted for around half of his personal revenue, according to a 2016 financial disclosure, and he has rejected calls to fully divest from his family’s golfing empire.While there had been whispers that Mr. Trump might make an appearance on Sunday, the White House called off a visit to an undisclosed location in the afternoon because of rain. But the reminders on the links of Mr. Trump’s affiliations were not subtle.Attendees held club-branded umbrellas and wore club-branded floppy hats as golf carts with the Trump name whizzed by. Those entering the tournament stopped to pose in front of a sign next to the clubhouse with the family’s “coat of arms.”In a Fox News interview this weekend at the course, Mr. Trump’s son Eric arrived on a Trump-branded helicopter, declaring the club a “home away from home” for the family. Last week, Eric Trump and his brother Donald Jr. — despite pledges to separate politics and their involvement in the family’s business — met with officials at the Republican National Committee headquarters, in part to discuss strategy.As spectators filed into the tournament, some of the several dozen protesters chanted, “What do we want? Impeachment! When do we want it? Now!” Others shouted, “Russia’s puppet has to go!”Those sympathetic to Mr. Trump responded with chants of “Lock her up!” and “U.S.A.!”Even tournament officials were absorbed in the mix of sports and politics. Derrick Cooper, a rules official from Warrington, England, said friends were amused when he told them of the course where he was scheduled to officiate.“They all said, ‘That’s interesting — to say the least,’” Mr. Cooper said. “I don’t think I’ve ever refereed on a golf course that’s owned by a president, so it’s definitely a first.”Those inside the gates felt detached from the clamor at the course’s doorstep. Cody Waring, 18, of Montgomery County, Md., came with his grandfather, both of them in “Make America Great Again” caps. Mr. Waring said he had canceled plans to attend the Washington Nationals game when he heard he might have a chance to see Mr. Trump at the tournament.“I think it’s an important statement to make with the hat — you bet,” Mr. Waring said as he waited for a group to finish putting on the 15th hole, near a plaque featuring a questionable piece of Civil War history that Mr. Trump credits to the course.“I just want to show support for the president,” Mr. Waring said. “I know he’s going through tough times now with the way the news media is covering him, in ways that I would call unfair.”Brian Jamerson, of Williamsburg, Va., said he was not bothered by the president’s continued connections to the course. “His name was already here before he got elected, so I don’t think he’s put himself in any worse position than he was already in,” he said. “As long as he keeps his personal actions out of it and lets his son do more of the work.”By day’s end, even the golf itself could not fully escape associations with Mr. Trump. The winner of the tournament, Bernhard Langer, was caught a few months ago in a presidential controversy of his own, when Mr. Trump told congressional Republicans that the “very famous” golfer had confirmed to him clear evidence of voter fraud that he had witnessed while waiting in line to vote in the November election. Mr. Langer, who is a German citizen, was, in fact, in no such line, because he is ineligible to vote.“Please give my best regards to your dad,” Mr. Langer said to Eric Trump at the championship trophy ceremony.