https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/09/us/politics/celebrities-voting.html
Celebrities Are Voting, Then Putting Stickers on Their Faces - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016
Nov. 8, 2016
4902
A decade ago the hip hop mogul Sean Combs, or P. Diddy as he was known then, sought to drive people to the polls with the slogan “Vote or Die!”This year, perhaps for obvious reasons, some voters have taken that slogan to heart, and no such prompting has been needed.The “I Voted” sticker is the day’s hot new celebrity accessory.Below, a roundup of famous faces at the polls — and on the campaign trail.(Voting selfies are illegal in many states, so we can’t always know for sure, but many of the stars are wearing the stickers on their faces, or elsewhere.)Chance the Rapper led a parade through his hometown of Chicago on Monday, Ferris-Bueller-style, but its finale was a polling place, not a dash through suburban backyards.Chance is generally civically inclined: One of the songs from his latest album, “Coloring Book,” leads off with a complaint that children are not taught about taxes in school.Drew Barrymore, a star known for her work in such landmark movies as “E.T the Extra-Terrestrial” and “50 First Dates” voted.Tom Brady, the quarterback of the New England Patriots, voted, though there is some controversy about for whom. Donald J. Trump has claimed that he had the vote of the Patriots star, and his coach, Bill Belichick. But Gisele Bündchen, Mr. Brady’s wife, responded to an Instagram commenter asking her if she and her husband were backing Mr. Trump with a firm “No!”Eva Longoria, a star from the television show “Desperate Housewives” and later the executive producer of the show “Devious Maids,” voted.It’s not clear whether the rocker Ted Nugent, who has been stumping for Mr. Trump for much of the year, has voted yet. But in a radio interview, he posited a rhetorical question about Hillary Clinton voters:“How much soullessness must exist to vote for that kind of person?” he asked.Then too, there was Heidi Klum, whom Wikipedia calls “a German-American model, television personality, businesswoman, fashion designer, television producer and occasional actress.” She also voted.Mario Lopez, the television personality, voted.Scott Adams, the creater of the “Dilbert,’’ comic strip has endorsed Donald J. Trump and in September wrote a blog post about why. But it was not clear if he had voted yet.The actress Olivia Wilde voted.Larry the Cable Guy has perhaps not yet voted but has said that Hillary Clinton will be the “end of the country.”Katy Perry voted. So did Chris Evans, Karlie Kloss and Anthony Hopkins.Pusha T, a rapper whose government name is Terrence Thornton and who used to be in a duo called the Clipse with his brother (who performed under the name Malice), is featured in a long article in New York magazine, in which he discusses how he campaigned for Hillary Clinton for much of 2016.At one point in the article, the author describes a time at which Pusha was getting his picture taken and the photographer said that he would not be voting.“No way, man,” Pusha is reported as having said. “You got to vote.”We will be closely tracking Pusha’s Instagram account today, but I have faith that he’ll vote, even if he does not post proof there.Jessica Biel  voted.Shane Kimbrough, who is an astronaut, which used to automatically make a person a celebrity but is now for the most part just considered a Very Cool Job, voted from space. The process actually began six months ago because when you orbit the Earth at 17,000 miles an hour, it makes sense to vote with an absentee ballot.In a Tumblr post, NASA joked about what it called “space voting.”“While astronauts don’t have to wait in line for his ballot like the rest of us, there is one disadvantage to voting in space: They miss out on the highly coveted “I Voted” sticker.”