https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/22/magazine/the-national-fronts-post-charlie-hebdo-moment.html
The National Front’s Post-Charlie Hebdo Moment - The New York Times
National Front (France),Le Pen  Marine,France,Immigration and Emigration,Elections,Foreign Workers,Charlie Hebdo,Relaunch-Ebay
Feb. 18, 2015
7834
St.-Raphaël, a resort town on the French Riviera, is subdued in January, suspended in a state of waiting. Its seaside carousel is brilliantly lit but scarcely used, its hotels are mostly shuttered, its streets are nearly deserted by nightfall. On Jan. 16, however, just nine days after French jihadists stormed the Paris offices of the magazine Charlie Hebdo, a crowd gathered in the drizzling rain outside a small St.-Raphaël storefront. In summer days past, the shop sold cheap floppy sun hats to tourists on a table outside, but now a pole with a French flag stood there instead, and a banner had replaced the signs of commerce over the door. The space had been converted into a campaign office for two candidates running for local office, both of whom belonged to the National Front.The political party presents itself as the protector of France — of both its cultural heritage and its borders — and the crowd had come together in St.-Raphaël to support the candidates at what might be a crucial moment of opportunity for the party. The event could not start, however, until the arrival of one of the National Party’s young stars, David Rachline, the 27-year-old mayor of Fréjus, the town next to St.-Raphaël. Dressed formally in a tailored overcoat, Rachline exited from a car not long after 7 o’clock that evening to hugs, cheers and chants: “Da-veed, Da-veed, Da-veed!”He represented more than local leadership. For some attendees, he offered long-awaited vindication; for others, the promise of the party’s future. Long associated with anti-Semitism and paranoid conspiracy theories, the National Front of late has been toning down its language and moving toward respectability under the leadership of Marine Le Pen. The party’s president since 2011, Le Pen, who campaigns on an anti-immigration and anti-European platform, is increasingly seen as a serious presidential candidate in the 2017 elections. Pictures of her lined the walls of the new campaign office: “Liberty — it’s Marine!” “Justice — it’s Marine!” “Jobs — it’s Marine!” Le Pen is the ubiquitous face of the National Front, so much so that one of her main tasks now is convincing the French that the party is more than one telegenic woman with a large bullhorn.Rachline, a National Front activist since the age of 15 and the son of a Jewish father, won 45 percent of the vote in Fréjus last March. During his campaign, he spoke out against the building of a new mosque in town. With a population of 53,000, Fréjus is one of the more substantial communities run by the National Front. Rachline has since become one of the first two members of the party ever elected to France’s Senate.For most of its history, the National Front served France as a protest party with little real political power. Le Pen’s father, Jean-Marie Le Pen, founded the party in 1972, attracting an ultranationalist and unsavory assortment of fascist sympathizers, colonial enthusiasts, Catholic moralists and other reactionaries longing for some idealized version of France’s proud past. The party has always positioned itself as the country’s last defense against the forces undermining its foundation. At first, those forces were communists, then, eventually, as the French economy weakened and communism faltered, the party switched targets, focusing on France’s immigrants, most of whom were North African. “Two million unemployed is two million immigrants too many,” read one famous National Front poster from the ’80s. Under the leadership of Marine Le Pen, the party has managed to refine its populist, nationalist appeal while shedding the worst of its past associations, a feat of messaging that has started to yield actual results. Last spring, the National Front won 25 percent of the vote in European elections, which gave it the right to call itself the most popular party in France right now. Rachline is one of 11 National Front mayors elected in France last March — a fraction of the country’s thousands, but a record for the party nonetheless.In St.-Raphaël, the rain started coming down in earnest as the crowd crammed into the small, windowless office. Rachline squeezed his way through, clutching forearms and giving one supporter after another a double kiss. The smell of cigarette smoke and wet wool filled the air; the office, hot, packed and bright, seemed just barely able to contain the ambition and emotion and pride of the moment. “David Rachline is the sixth-most-important person in the National Front,” Rachline’s chief aide, Julien Jouniaux, a former prison guard, told me earlier in the day.Finally, Rachline took the mike. He started with a small, intimate story that he knew would draw the crowd close. It was about galette des rois, a cake that the French eat in January, a tradition tied to Epiphany, the Christian holiday. The dessert contains either a bean or a small porcelain figure, and whoever finds it gets to be “king” or “queen” for the day. It is a quintessentially French celebration.“I see we’re not going to have the chance to enjoy the galette tonight,” Rachline said. But he explained that it was on his mind because of an email he received from a school principal. “She said, ‘You know, Mr. Mayor, the prize inside the cake was a little baby Jesus — and that probably goes against the law enforcing secularism in public spaces.’ ”The audience groaned. The National Front embraces laïcité, the secularist principle underlying laws in France that prohibit religious symbols and acts in public spaces like schools and government offices; but it tends to insist on that policy most vociferously when the religious custom in question — head scarves, for example — happens to be Muslim, not Christian.Rachline continued: “I said, ‘Look, the Epiphany cake is a really important tradition for our country.’ And I told her, ‘It’s more natural to find a baby Jesus inside than to find a Turkish delight!’ ” The audience roared and applauded.Turkish delight is regarded in France as a North African treat, someone at the event explained to me. It is, in other words, the candy of immigrants, an import, an invader, the likes of which the mayor was there to fend off in the name of French civilization.Rachline, who has good timing, waited for the crowd to quiet down. “Maybe that shocked her,” he said. “But I said you have to get used to it. Because in Fréjus, yes, we do eat the galette des rois with the little baby Jesus inside — and nothing else!”Over three days in January, the terrorist attacks in and around Paris claimed 17 victims’ lives, a national blow to which the French responded almost immediately with a show of unity, including a march that drew upward of a million people. Almost two weeks after the first attack, the spirit of “Je Suis Charlie” — a shorthand expression that came to embody all manner of good intentions — was still strong, but the initial warmth with which even relative strangers in Paris treated one another was already cooling. “Let me guess,” a man running a newsstand near my hotel said wearily as a couple approached him with a hopeful look on their faces. “Charlie Hebdo.” They had put their name on a waiting list for the first issue published after the attack. He checked his notebook; yes, their turn had finally come. He took their money and handed them the magazine.On the newsstand, that week’s French edition of Elle magazine showed, against a background of pale blue, a simply sketched dove holding a pencil in its beak, an evocation of the drawings for which the illustrators at Charlie Hebdo were targeted. The newspapers were still overwhelmingly focused on the attacks; Libération’s front page featured an article about what recent events meant for Le Pen. The news vendor’s face soured as I picked it up. “She’s over,” he said. “She’s crazy.” Le Pen is often dismissed by Parisians as a kind of scary clown, a divisive menace — maybe even a smart menace, but ultimately a political joke.Yet a recent poll found that if Le Pen ran for president now, she would finish ahead of all presumed contenders, including Nicolas Sarkozy, a conservative former president of France, and François Hollande, the current Socialist president. Much of her party’s support comes from regions far from Paris, in areas gutted by deindustrialization or in tiny towns struggling with budget cuts and trying to keep traditional village life going: the local post office, the train station. Both anti-establishment and populist, the National Front has cast itself as a party for the little people, with a mix of proposals that confound current American notions of right and left. Its platform calls for the preservation of local services, protectionist trade policies and higher taxes on the rich. Many of its promises — reduced unemployment, lower taxes on the poor and middle class, more accessible housing — are presented as the logical outgrowth of its sweeping anti-immigration policy, which calls for the “systematic expulsion of all illegal immigrants arriving or living in France,” shorter residency permits and the reduction of the yearly immigration rate to 10,000 newcomers, down from 200,000.The party, well aware of its relative strengths and limitations, made a conscious decision in 2012 to focus on specific towns in the 2014 elections. In the newsmagazine Le Nouvel Observateur, Nicolas Lebourg — a French historian who studied party documents related to the training of activists and political interns — laid out the party’s calculation: towns were easier to win than cities but would still garner much attention from the news media. The National Front clearly hoped that the visibility of any elected mayors would help the party shed the longstanding stereotype of its typical member: an old guy in a leather jacket, longing for the glory days of France’s colonial past, cracking jokes about Arabs and Jews, with little real interest in the tedium of managing a budget. The last time the National Front had several mayors elected, in the 1990s, two of the four became embroiled in widely ­publicized legal cases while still in office. This time around, the mayors were expected to do better. “Professionalization and entrenchment,” Lebourg wrote, “were the two words that kept coming up in regards to the 2014 local elections.”One year into their jobs, the mayors have received extensive press, not all of it good. In Hayange, a steel-manufacturing town in the northeast, the new mayor, Fabien Engelmann, became the object of media controversy when his office sent a halal butcher, who prepares meat according to Muslim law, a letter insisting that he abide by the frequently flouted rule requiring shops to stay closed on Sunday mornings. That same mayor’s office also informed a dance teacher hoping to rent space for a North African-style dance class that she could not do so, on the grounds that the class was “incompatible with the National Front.” And according to a fellow member of the National Front working in his office, the mayor asked if there was a way to move local merchants of Arab descent farther from the center of town. (The mayor has denied this.) Engelmann is now contesting charges of campaign-finance violations.Rachline, by contrast, seems determined to be noticed only as a paragon of professionalism. His campaign questioned the building of the town’s mosque, but he is no longer standing in its way. He implemented standard, but relatively uncontroversial, National Front policies — cutting a social-­service organization’s funds, increasing the local police force. Two or three armed officers now stand conspicuously outside the mayor’s office, which looks onto an open square with a medieval cathedral on one side.Rachline was fortunate to have run for office at a moment when the town was in need of a strong manager, if not a savior. Fréjus was in financial crisis when he started his campaign. “We’re the fifth-most-indebted town in France,” I heard from almost every resident I spoke to.At an outdoor bar just up the street from the mayor’s office, Christine Bertolo, a 60-year-old retired housekeeper, was drinking with three friends. They all happily volunteered that they had voted National Front in the mayoral elections and would most likely vote for Le Pen in 2017. Bertolo — who described herself as “disgusted” by her country’s mainstream politicians — characterized Fréjus as a microcosm of France. The former mayor was charged with corruption (also true of Sarkozy), municipal finances were terrible (France’s economic growth is lagging) and the quality of life was in steep decline (a complaint heard nationwide). “For 30 years, all the mayors, on the left and on the right, they’ve been filling their pockets,” Bertolo said. “And we’re the ones who fall through the holes.”She said what people often say before they admit to voting for the Front: “I’m not racist, but. . . . ” What comes next is usually one of the following: “something has to change,” “the cost of living is too high,” “the politicians have done nothing,” “we have too much immigration.” Or, in Bertolo’s case, “they have lost our trust.” She meant the politicians: Hollande has not delivered on his campaign promise to increase taxes on the rich, spending much of his political capital instead on marriage rights for gay couples; Sarkozy, on the right, alienated the working class and was captured on camera telling a farmer to “shove off” (with an added epithet). Possibly, Bertolo said, Le Pen would be better; she could not be worse.As for Rachline, he had already won her over. She was particularly enthusiastic about his promises to ensure that someone like her, and not just another immigrant in town, received subsidized housing.In Fréjus, as in the rest of France, the immigrant population does not always feel welcome, and tensions flare. Six years ago, the town endured riots after a young Moroccan man, from a heavily immigrant neighborhood where the mosque is now being built, ran his motorcycle into a tree and died; he was evading a police barricade when he struck the tree.Starting in the 1950s, an influx of immigrants from Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia arrived in France, to meet the country’s growing need for labor in its coal mines and factories. But, as the French often put it, officials “parked” those workers and eventually their families in isolated housing projects that bred alienation; the jobs began to disappear, and the expected smooth integration failed to take place. Given the high unemployment in France, Le Pen rails against the arrival of new immigrants, 200,000 of whom have come every year since 2004. Muslims are now thought to make up about 8 percent of the country, and France now has the largest Muslim population in Western Europe. Four out of 10 French recently surveyed said they considered Muslims “to be a threat to our national identity.” Le Pen was playing on those fears a few years ago when she referred to Muslims praying in the streets as an “occupation” of France.That night in St.-Raphaël, Rachline spoke of his intention to make sure that citizens in Fréjus got housing rather than people “from here and from there.” He displayed a cagey sense of how far he could push his rhetoric while remaining within acceptable bounds. His indignant anecdote about the galette was only the beginning; he went on to rouse the crowd with post-Charlie Hebdo talking points, reminding his respectfully hushed audience that the National Front had long predicted just such an attack. “Surely we can no longer wonder whether there might be some connection between this lightning-fast rise of radical fundamentalist Islam and this rampant immigration,” he said, “which we knew was the risk, which we have recognized as the danger.”He knew he shouldn’t mix all Muslims together, and he didn’t, conceding that most were not terrorists after all. “But in Europe recently,” he said, in a clearly climactic moment, “all the terrorists are Muslims.”At that moment, as the audience cheered Rachline, I recalled a conversation we had earlier in the day in his office, when I asked him to describe the racial makeup of his high school. “I never count French people based on their origins or their religion,” he said. “I always just consider French people as French.”It was strange to hear this liberal sensitivity from Rachline, of all people. He advocates the death penalty for rapists.But Rachline’s deflection on the question of race was not at all surprising to Vincent Pons, a French academic I met in Paris the next day. Pons, a campaign expert — a company he founded provides technological support to candidates — reminded me how difficult it is to map basic American assumptions onto the French political landscape. “In France, officially, we don’t have race,” he said; it is illegal, for example, to ask about race or religion on any government form. “We just pretend that race does not matter, but it’s this crazy thing — of course it matters,” he said. “There are no statistics, so you can make no policy around it. But even if you tried, you’d be accused of making too much of race.”Citizenship in France is supposed to confer complete equality, but the National Front, and many French all over the political spectrum, believe that privilege comes with the expectation of strict assimilation — no head scarves in school, no race-based interest groups, no questioning of the baby Jesus in the galette, no balking at the school’s lunch of roast pork. When it comes to laïcité, the differences between those on the left, the right and the far right are sometimes most apparent in the varying hostility with which they deliver remarkably similar views.Pons and I met at a brasserie, where our table was inches from one occupied by an older man, who was bundled in layers, drinking wine and listening in on our conversation until he could hold his tongue no longer. As a former teacher, he wanted to help explain. “There are the français de souche,” he said — the “French of the soil,” shorthand for the “real” French — and “then there are the French who are only French because they have the right papers.” Pons politely pointed out that his own father was Alsatian and that he himself therefore hardly qualified as français de souche. “Eh, I myself am Breton,” the man replied, in a friendly nonanswer. He had other opinions to share: The press had overblown the unity march, the students would see that their leaders did nothing and, by the way, that Charlie Hebdo? “It was a rag!” He had been reading a newspaper, which he left behind when he wished us good night and left. It was Présent, a far-right-wing publication. Its headline: “And Anyway — the Problem Really Is Islam!”To help guide the party’s new mayors, the National Front has published what it calls “The Little Practical Guide for Elected City Officials of the National Front.” Its introduction states that hundreds of newly elected party officials will be serving as “indispensable conduits for the dissemination of our ideas, and the taking of power in 2017.” The guide, which is 107 pages, discusses protocol, explains some basic accounting principles for the uninitiated and exhorts readers to be “smiling and agreeable” in public. Its message is to take courage: “Victory is so close!”Under Le Pen, the National Front has revived a tradition of controlling its propaganda — with trainings, media coaching, brochures, talking points and economic analyses provided to volunteers and would-be candidates. One evening in Paris last month, Gilles Parmentier, a 21-year-old city councilman from a troubled Parisian suburb, led a training session for the National Front’s youth group.Parmentier started out by indirectly acknowledging a paradox of the National Front: The party is wildly popular and at the same time is so reviled that many of its supporters prefer to keep their allegiance secret. That can make it hard to recruit candidates for office.“Not everyone wants to have their photo on posters all over town,” said Parmentier, who is still a student. “So you could actually think about campaigning in the part of the neighborhood where you don’t live — or in a different town. You can use your middle name. Or your maiden name. No one will make the connection, and you’ll be safe, in regards to your job, your future and your friends.”In his V-neck sweater and with his hair neatly parted on one side, Parmentier looked as if he had stepped out of a brochure for some small American liberal-arts college. (He would be the one throwing a Frisbee on the green, not the student staring at a Bunsen burner.) He was addressing a crowd of about 30 or so young people, most of whom were male and listening closely. Moving on to the logistics of campaigning, he suggested that anyone interested in building support for the party should simply head to the neighborhoods “where people live in poverty, who live right next to immigrants, who live right next to this misery and poverty, to rampant immigration and Islam and radical fundamentalist Islam.” Once you find those people, he advised, you introduce yourself as their savior: “Hello, I’m your National Front representative. I represent Marine and her values. I’m going to help you fix your problems.”Because he was there specifically to coach young party members, he tried to make the case that inexperience need not be equated with incompetence. The National Front has always put young people’s careers on the fast track, he pointed out — just look at Marion Maréchal-Le Pen, Marine’s niece, who was voted into the National Assembly at 22. And that guy in Fréjus, what was his name again?“Rachline!” someone called out.Parmentier had not quite mastered Rachline’s gift for drawing the line at just the right place, with just the right smile or euphemism. In criticizing his own town’s mayor, with whom he has often feuded, Parmentier described him as having the qualities “of a little king, of a petty tyrant,” then, under his breath, “of a Moroccan, or Tunisian, or whatever.” He sometimes drifted off midsentence, nervous, only to come bounding back with a show of machismo. He warned his young friends that once you were voted into office, you had to conduct yourself in a manner that reflected well on the party. If some jerk is messing with you, you can’t just break his face, he said, though his language was more crass than that.For more visible positions, Le Pen personally “approves or vetoes every significant candidate in the areas where the National Front has a shot of winning,” according to Abel Mestre, who covers the National Front for Le Monde. A team of young volunteers working under Florian Philippot, a party vice president, devotes considerable attention to scanning various candidates’ Facebook pages, looking for anything that will embarrass the party or embroil the candidate in legal problems. In mid-December, for example, a departmental candidate in southwestern France reportedly posted on her Facebook page: “Your grandparents fought so you would not become German. . . . fight so you don’t become Arab.” Party officials claimed that the candidate’s site had been hacked.Like Parmentier, the young people in attendance at the National Front’s youth event were almost uniformly earnest, and some showed more polish than their speaker. “We are all patriots here,” a young man wearing a tie told me, straightening up as he said it. A young woman said the party’s family values appealed to her; a young man said he was tired of answering to Washington and Brussels.After half an hour, the audience started getting restless. The conversation took one last turn, to a familiar National Front target — local subsidies, often deemed wasteful, to various organizations. “Which association gobbles up the most money?” a young man asked. Another attendee couldn’t resist — he called out the name of a Jewish one. The audience laughed.Two days before I met Marine Le Pen, her father, Jean-Marie Le Pen, took a call from a Russian reporter and agreed, when asked, that the Paris attacks had “the look of something the Secret Service would have staged.” His comments circulated widely in the news media, and Marine Le Pen quickly went out of her way to dismiss them as a “woolly conspiracy theory.”I wondered how those moments played out within the family. Did she ever pick up the phone to let him know that he was meddling with her campaign strategy? “I’ve stopped doing that,” she told me in her office in Nanterre. “He just says, ‘I’m a free man. I’ll say what I want.’ ”Tall, blond, stately and brisk, Le Pen has little of her father’s effortless showmanship. Instead, she offers relatability. At 46, she is twice-divorced and a mother of three, her hair held back with a bright plastic clip; a hot-pink e-cigarette sits on her desk. The National Front has never attracted more female voters.Jean-Marie Le Pen’s presidential ambitions were always considered more of a spectacle than a serious prospect. His history of unnerving extreme-right alliances and outrageous provocations was too extensive. Most infamously, he characterized the gas chambers of Nazi Germany as a “detail of World War II history.” (Mention his name, and many French will just say, “Detail, detail,” with a shake of the head.) Patients who were H.I.V.-­positive, he once proposed, should be isolated in an “AIDS-atorium.” In 2002, he stunned the country by winning enough votes in the first round of the presidential election to make it to the second; the country, seemingly appalled by its own conduct, then voted overwhelmingly for his opponent, whose margin of victory was about 65 points.Although Marine Le Pen would most likely fare better than her father, that second round remains a major, if not unmovable, obstacle standing between the National Front and the presidency. Even if she makes it to the runoff, whichever mainstream party loses the first round would almost inevitably direct its voters to support the other mainstream party, an alliance called the “republican front.”Le Pen is nonetheless charging full tilt at the 2017 campaign. She recently added to her team Sébastien Chenu, a former national secretary in France’s center-right party (the U.M.P.) and the founder of a gay rights organization that supports same-sex marriage, which the National Front officially opposes. Factions in the party objected to Chenu, loudly. “Yes, there were people who said, ‘Another gay,’ ” Chenu told me. (Philippot, who serves as Le Pen’s chief adviser, is also gay.) “But she told them: “This is not a religious sect, it’s a political party. I want to win, and I need competent people.’ ”In her office, Le Pen acknowledged that there was some dissent in her ranks. “There’s always going to be a conservative element in the party,” she said, “but I’m always trying to move the party forward a bit. A leader has to be a little avant-garde, to have vision. And to me, Sébastien represents the idea that anyone has a place at the National Front. We don’t defend religious or ethnic interests — no, we defend the French. It’s like McDonald’s,” she said, pleased to have landed on a simile that an American reporter would surely appreciate. “Come as you are.”At times, it seems that Le Pen can barely maintain discipline among the factions in her top leadership, much less among the thousands of local candidates posting on their Facebook accounts. In late January, Aymeric Chauprade, then the National Front’s chief delegate to the European Union, uploaded a video of himself online saying that France was “at war with Muslims — not with all Muslims, but with Muslims.” Invoking the language of the party of yore, he warned of a “fifth column” ready to undermine France from within. Le Pen fired him — she has tried to move away from her father’s party’s premonitions of civil war — but she could not fire her niece, the assemblywoman, who disseminated Chauprade’s video via Twitter despite her aunt’s clear directive, partywide, not to promote the delegate’s words. Nor could she fire her father, who posted a photo of his daughter, in the middle of the Paris attacks, along with the slogan “Keep Calm and Vote Le Pen.” “You have a father, too, right?” she said to me. “You know, you can disagree but still have mutual respect. It’s not always easy though, especially in politics.”When her father founded the National Front in the 1970s, it was above all an anti-communist party. These days, in Le Pen’s office, a framed poster leans against the wall; it shows a giant hand of God pointing down at a mass of small, suffering people under “Remember the Hungry” in Russian. “A Russian friend gave it to me,” Le Pen said. “It’s a vintage poster from the Russian Revolution.” Le Pen, who vocally supports President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia in his dispute with Ukraine, recently borrowed millions of dollars from a Russian bank — none of the French ones, she has complained, would lend her money.One of Le Pen’s most polarizing proposals is that France abandon the euro, which her critics argue would bring ruin to the economy — and it might be one of many reasons French banks would be disinclined to help her. It is also why many people consider her an unrealistic presidential candidate, whatever her poll numbers.“At the end of the day,” a French friend of mine in the finance world told me, “there are too many people with too much money who would do anything to make sure it doesn’t happen. It can’t happen.”Hénin-Beaumont, a former coal-mining town in the country’s north, is one of those seemingly rare towns in France with no tourism to speak of. A large mall is a main employer, along with a factory that turns chicken into nuggets.Its downtown is unexceptional — a pharmacy, a Domino’s pizza, some small shops — but last year it drew crowds from all over the region at Christmastime. On the day a new Christmas market opened in the square, a Santa Claus rappelled down from the clock tower on the 90-year-old town hall, then threw out to the assembled children hundreds of bags filled with chocolates and other candy. There was a laser show; families and visitors skated on a temporary rink. People shopped to the sound of a Czech chorus singing carols in the square.A month later, people were still talking about the festival, especially when the name of the new mayor, Steeve Briois, came up. “I can say nothing bad about him,” said Mary-Renée Boutaleb, who is 58 and has lived in Hénin-Beaumont most of her adult life. “The Christmas market was beautiful.” But it clearly pained her, at least a little, to admit it, given that Briois is a National Front mayor, the first in the town’s history. Briois is one of five party vice presidents, a linchpin in an area crucial for Le Pen, according to James Shields, the author of “The Extreme Right in France” and a professor of French politics at Aston University.“From where she is now, being president is unrealistic,” Shields told me. “But winning a region would say to the parties on the mainstream right and left: ‘Now we’re a big player. Do you want us to take more regions from you next time?’ Her strategy is to become irresistible as an alliance partner.”For decades, Hénin-Beaumont and the surrounding region voted left in huge numbers. The workers there, and in most of northern France, were considered the base of the Socialist Party, the ouvriers who regarded it as their protector and advocate. But last March, the town flipped. More than 50 percent of its voters backed Briois, who ran on a campaign promising tax relief and competence; the previous Socialist mayor was sentenced to four years in prison for abusing public funds and left the town deep in debt.Boutaleb and her husband, Moussa, a retired welder, served coffee and small chocolates on a modern silver set when I visited their home in January. Moussa, a sturdy, proud man of 59 — he had been the president of the mosque in Hénin-­Beaumont — looked down at his coffee. He adjusted his square saucer, lining it up with the edge of the table, the sound of the cup rattling quietly in his living room. And then he made a confession to his wife: Yes, he said, yes, he could imagine voting for Le Pen.His wife was silent, but her face was a mask of reproach. She clearly received this news as a wound rather than as some difference of opinion. His statement hung in the air for a long, uncomfortable minute.“Me, never,” she said when the same question was put to her. “The party scares me. It scares me for my children.”Moussa’s parents were French citizens born in Algeria when it was still a French department; his wife’s family is French, going back many centuries. Mary-Renée knew some of the National Front deputies in town; she knew with total certainty, she said, that there were racists among them.“There are racists in the P.S., too,” Moussa said, referring to the Socialist Party. And France, he said, had had enough — enough immigration, enough bullying from the European Union, enough bad leadership. “It lost its luster,” he said, rattling his spoon. “Its hands are tied.” And although he said he was humane — he felt that people have a right to live better lives — even he, the child of Algerians, could not support how much immigration France allowed. “It makes it hard for the immigrants who are already here,” he said.Mary-Renée could understand why the party had picked up strength. “They take in anyone unhappy,” she said, “the people who are worried about immigration, the unemployed, the racists.” In one sense, it had something for everyone, she said, but it also had baggage she could not ignore.When Briois started campaigning for the National Front as a teenager 27 years ago, he was an outcast — students called him a Nazi, teachers picked political fights with him in class. Once an object of contempt, he is now the wildly popular mayor, someone Moussa admires for his efficiency, his hard work, the LED lights he installed throughout town.“He’s very close to the people,” Moussa said. “He’s a humanist.” Moussa recalled the days in the late 1990s when Briois campaigned heavily against the mosque, which Moussa and his colleagues were then trying to establish. “He was handing out fliers,” he said. So what changed for Briois, for Moussa? After a long silence, Moussa answered: “The party changed.”After the attacks in Paris, Briois personally reached out to the mosque to let its members know that he stood with them and to invite them to a rally in town. The Socialist community refused to attend the mayor’s rally — the Socialists held their own ­— but many Muslims did. That was the National Front that Moussa was seeing, not the young activist at the youth group or the mayor targeting a Muslim merchant in a town 200 miles away or the prominent public figures suggesting that millions of Muslims want to attack the French. Even if Le Pen is never elected president, the party could succeed another way: by pulling the right further right, mainstreaming and normalizing hostility toward anyone who does not conform to their notion of what it means to be French.On a car ride to the train station, Moussa and I talked a little bit about his family. He and his wife had taken in a foster child, and he had an older son living in Lille, a major city nearby. He was proud of his son, who had a good job as an engineer at an energy company. But his son told his parents that ever since the attacks, he felt uncomfortable in France. Moussa sounded distracted as he was driving, but he kept talking. His son, he said, is dark-skinned like him. Now he was thinking about leaving the country altogether. He worried that he could “find himself in the wrong place at the wrong time,” he said. France was his home, but anything could happen there.