https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/10/sports/tennis/wimbledon-2015-garbine-muguruza-agnieszka-radwanska-serena-williams-maria-sharapova.html
Wimbledon 2015: Serena Williams and Garbiñe Muguruza Gain Final - The New York Times
Tennis,Williams  Serena,Sharapova  Maria,Muguruza  Garbine,Radwanska  Agnieszka,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament
July 9, 2015
4835
WIMBLEDON, England —  There are few things that put Serena Williams in a cheerful and expansive mood more easily than a dominant victory over Maria Sharapova.Williams defeated Sharapova for the 17th consecutive time, this one by 6-2, 6-4 in a Wimbledon semifinal Thursday that lasted 1 hour 19 minutes. That was slightly more time than Williams spent in a news conference waxing philosophically about some of her tennis aspirations.With a victory in the final Saturday against Garbiñe Muguruza and seven more wins at the United States Open, Williams would reach 22 Grand Slam titles and tie Steffi Graf’s Open era record. She would also complete a calendar-year Grand Slam, last achieved by Graf in 1988.Before Wimbledon began, Williams embargoed questions about the possibility of winning all four Grand Slam tournaments in 2015. She later mocked what she called “the alleged Serena Slam” of holding all four major titles at the same time. That could be coming, too, with a win Saturday.But after taking down Sharapova again, Williams was at least willing to explain why she lowered the cone of silence on questions about the Grand Slam.“It felt good,” she said. “I don’t want the pressure of that, and I’m not thinking of that. When you talk about it every time, you can’t help but think about it. It’s been O.K. just to free my brain from that.”Since she won her 18th Grand Slam title at the United States Open last year, Williams has said she felt such relief at catching Chris Evert and Martina Navratilova in that category that she was no longer desperate to win, as she once was. She has since passed Evert and Navratilova and, with her 20th Grand Slam victory at this year’s French Open, she is two behind Graf. Therein lies her motivation.“Right now, it’s definitely the obvious,” Williams said. “It was never my goal. But, you know, right now it’s kind of cool. So that completely gets me motivated to work harder and to try to reach my goals.”A victory on Saturday is not guaranteed, Williams pointed out, because Muguruza is a more difficult matchup for her than Sharapova is. Muguruza, after all, has at least beaten Williams in the last 10 years — surprising Williams in the second round at the French Open last year on her way to the quarterfinals.After that match, Williams said, she worked on specific deficiencies, and she won three of the next four major titles.“It was an eye-opening loss for me,” she said. “Some losses you’re angry about, and some losses you learn from. That loss, I think I learned the most from in a long time.”Sharapova, on the other hand, has not yet learned enough from her extensive list of losses to Williams. The last time she beat Williams was in November 2004.Patrick Mouratoglou, Williams’s coach, said it was not a matter of a mental block for Sharapova — Williams is just a better player. He also said that No. 23-seeded Victoria Azarenka, who took Williams to three sets in the quarterfinals, is better than Sharapova, the No. 4 seed.Sharapova indicated that personal comments she made about Mouratoglou and Williams in 2013 motivated him to say that. Regardless, she acknowledged she needed to do more to beat Williams.“A lot more than I’m doing,” she said.Returning Williams’s serve better would help, but few players find that to be an easy task. On Thursday, Williams’s already-dominant serve was exceptional. First, she placed a 122-miles-per-hour heater straight up the middle, and when Sharapova was looking for that, Williams served out wide.Williams had 13 aces, including two on second serves, and won 86 percent of points when she got her first serve in. She never faced a break point. If Williams was going to serve that well and also use her athleticism to smother the entire court, then there would be no recourse, even for someone as competitive as Sharapova.“That’s one of the reasons that she’s in the position she’s in today,” Sharapova said. “She’s able to come up with the goods from that serve when she’s down.”In the other semifinal, Muguruza, a 21-year-old Spaniard, barged into the final by beating 13th-seeded Agnieszka Radwanska, 6-2, 3-6, 6-3, on Centre Court.The last woman from Spain to reach the final of Wimbledon was Arantxa Sánchez Vicario in 1996, and the last Spanish winner was Conchita Martínez, two years before that. Muguruza said that Martínez had been sending her encouraging text messages, including tips on how to win at Wimbledon. They seem to be working.Muguruza, the 20th seed, was playing in her first Grand Slam semifinal. She is now in her first final, playing against a woman looking for her 21st major title, and her sixth at Wimbledon.“I’ve won so many Grand Slam titles,” Williams said. “I’m at a position where I don’t need to win another Wimbledon. I could lose tomorrow. Sure, I won’t be happy. But I don’t need another Wimbledon title. I don’t need another U.S. Open. I don’t need any titles to make it.”