http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/21/us/21gaines.html
Ernest J. Gaines Tends Land Where Ancestors Were Slaves - The New York Times
Gaines  Ernest J,Louisiana,Slavery,Writing and Writers
Oct. 20, 2010
3662
OSCAR, La. — His ancestors were slaves. They worked this flat plantation land just west of the snaking Mississippi, chopping sugar cane with their machetes. They and some of their descendants lived in the plantation’s “quarters.” And when they died, most were buried here in a small patch of earth, for blacks only.Ernest J. Gaines, 77, the acclaimed author of “The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman” and “A Lesson Before Dying,” is part of the fifth generation of this family to be born on the River Lake plantation. But unlike his ancestors, many of whom had nothing during their lives and were buried in unmarked wooden boxes that have since decayed, Mr. Gaines has built and owns his own house on the old plantation. He and his wife, Dianne Saulney Gaines, 70, a retired lawyer, have rescued the cemetery from near oblivion and they intend to be buried here themselves.Mr. Gaines has put down his pen — he wrote the first draft of all his novels in longhand — in the belief that he has “nothing original left to say.” He chronicled life in rural southern Louisiana, in a fictional version of this plantation, and his people, he said, showed him the meaning of dignity. As his friend Wendell Berry, the writer, once observed, he and Mr. Gaines “knew the talk of old people, old country people, in summer evenings.” Mr. Gaines’s goal now is to honor them by keeping up the cemetery.“This is what I do instead of writing,” Mr. Gaines said the other day, looking out at the above-ground cemetery vaults from the passenger seat of his car as his wife strolled the grounds, dry leaves and pecans crunching underfoot. Mr. Gaines has difficulty walking, having fallen down a flight of stairs in 1983 and undergone four back surgeries.“If I didn’t have those people back there, I would never have had anything to write about,” he said. “That’s where I got all my stories from. My life is from them.”About a decade ago, when Mr. and Mrs. Gaines were leaving the cemetery after a visit, they saw a “for sale” sign on an empty six-acre lot that had been part of the plantation. With the fruits of Mr. Gaines’s labors — several novels, a MacArthur Foundation “genius” grant and Oprah Winfrey’s selection of “Lesson” for her book club — they bought the property and built their own home.They also restored a small dilapidated church, built in the 1930s, where Mr. Gaines had sat for school lessons as a child. He and Mrs. Gaines had it moved from one part of the old plantation to their new backyard.“To come full circle that way is very, very powerful,” said Rudolph P. Byrd, a Gaines biographer and professor at Emory University. “That is not something that anyone expected a boy from the quarters to do.”From their new house, the Gaineses could see the old church and the massive pecan trees that border the cemetery, about three-fourths of a mile away. Years before buying the land, before they knew they would one day live so close, they began tending the cemetery. They also established the Mount Zion River Lake Cemetery Association, a nonprofit corporation, and in 1996, the owners of the cemetery, who were heirs of the plantation, deeded their interests to it.“He had an obsession that the sugar cane fields, which were coming closer and closer, would eventually plow it under and every remnant or memory of his people would be erased,” Mrs. Gaines said.This concern is evident in Mr. Gaines’s fiction. In “A Gathering of Old Men,” a character worries that the cane-cutting machines are “trying to get rid of all proof that black people ever farmed this land with plows and mules.” The character laments that his people “worked too hard, too hard to have that tractor just come in that graveyard and destroy all proof that they ever was.”It is not entirely fiction. Today, the cemetery sits as a one-acre oasis in the midst of towers of green sugar cane. In this, the “grinding season,” tractors are whacking down rows of stalks and loading them into haulers that crisscross the sugar fields on their way to a local mill. The other day, the trucks churned up blinding clouds of dust that coated the Gaineses’ car in a fine, gold film as they drove slowly to the burial ground.As part of their commitment to the cemetery, Mr. and Mrs. Gaines host a beautification day every year at the end of October, on the Saturday before All Saints’ Day. About 40 people, including family, friends and local residents, come and help clear fallen branches, rake leaves and pressure-wash the cement vaults.Then they feast on red beans and rice, gumbo and baked ham for two or three hours back at the house. “There’s always a feeling of euphoria,” Mrs. Gaines said, “of enjoying the moment.”This year, the University of Louisiana at Lafayette is taking advantage of the timing of the cemetery cleanup, when friends and family will be visiting, to honor Mr. Gaines the next day. They will be dedicating a center in his name to house his papers and promote research. He was a writer in residence and taught there for more than two decades.Marcia Gaudet, director of the center and a professor of English, said that Mr. Gaines’s early work was sometimes criticized by other black writers “for not being militant enough.” But she said he believed he could be more effective by writing about what he knew, which was life in the rural South.“His literature is based on memory of the past, and it’s somewhat different from that of many African-American writers of the mid-20th century, who based their work on erasure of that past and moving their characters to Northern urban settings,” Ms. Gaudet said. “Gaines was one of the first to go back and look at what the hardships were.”The stories of hardship lie in the graveyard. Mr. Gaines’s aunt, Augusteen Jefferson, who raised him, is buried here, though he is not sure where. She was disabled (“She had to crawl all over the floor her whole life”), but Mr. Gaines said she taught him “the importance of standing,” as he wrote in the dedication of “Miss Jane Pittman.”“They had nothing,” he said, looking at the vaults. “At least here they each have six foot of ground.”He added: “I’m going to do everything to keep up for them, in memory. That is my duty from now until I die.”