https://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/05/sports/basketball/brooklyn-nets-sergey-karasev-andrei-kirilenko.html
Sergey Karasev's Role Model, Andrei Kirilenko, Is Now His Teammate - The New York Times
Basketball,Kirilenko  Andrei,Karasev  Sergey,Brooklyn Nets
Oct. 4, 2014
3382
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. —  Given the physical demands of the N.B.A. and the continual influx of young talent into the league, a professional basketball player can feel old before he is halfway through his 30s. The sight of Sergey Karasev, then, has been a bit much for Andrei Kirilenko to process.Karasev, a 20-year-old shooting guard from Russia, was traded to the Nets over the summer and has been trying over the last couple of weeks to be noticed on a team stocked with veteran players. Although Karasev is in the early stages of his career, the 33-year-old Kirilenko can dig way back to recall the first time the two were on a basketball court together.It was in the late 1990s, when Kirilenko was a promising teenager playing for CSKA Moscow in the Russian league. On a day without a game or practice, several of the team’s players showed up at the gym anyway to shoot, and the team’s veteran point guard, Vasily Karasev, brought along his young son, Sergey.Sergey was about 5 years old, and Kirilenko and the other players goofed around with him, encouraging him to run around and toss up shots. Kirilenko picked up the boy over his shoulders so he could dunk on the 10-foot rims.Now Sergey Karasev, 6 feet 7 inches tall and capable of dunking just fine on his own, is Kirilenko’s teammate in the N.B.A.“It’s weird,” Kirilenko said.Karasev played sparingly last season as a rookie with the Cleveland Cavaliers. He is looking for a fresh start in Brooklyn, and it has helped in these early days to have a familiar face around.Karasev said he was too young the first few times he met Kirilenko to remember much about those interactions, but he can recall clearly the first time that his family’s friendship with Kirilenko paid off.He was 12 or 13 at the time, already a serious basketball prospect and participating in a training camp in Russia. Kirilenko, by then a star with the Utah Jazz, was at the same gym. At some point, Kirilenko came over to Karasev to say hello and chat. After Kirilenko walked away, Karasev turned and saw that the other youngsters on his team were staring at him in awe.“He was a very huge star — very, very famous,” Karasev said of Kirilenko. “Everybody knew him. He was a big guy in Russia.”The Karasev family moved around when Sergey was young — to Germany, to Turkey, to Greece — as Vasily, a widely respected point guard, signed to play in various leagues. Kirilenko said the older Karasev, now 43 and a coach in the Russian league, was good enough to play in the N.B.A., but he never did.Sergey Karasev said his father was his favorite player growing up, but Kirilenko’s career was the model that he and his peers wanted to follow. As Karasev became more serious about the game, his coaches in Russia often invoked Kirilenko’s success in the N.B.A. as a motivational tool. Karasev followed the N.B.A. from afar — Manu Ginobili was his favorite player in the league — and sometimes arose at dawn to watch big games.When Karasev joined his first professional team, Triumph Lyubertsy of the Russian league, in 2010, his father was on the coaching staff — first as an assistant, then as the head coach — and he told his son stories about Kirilenko.Karasev said: “My dad used to tell me about A.K.: ‘He became like this because he never stopped working. He came before practice. He stayed after. It doesn’t matter if the team spent three hours on the court. He stayed on the court after practice.’ ”Karasev said he would listen to Kirilenko’s advice this season and try to copy his work habits while trying to take the next step in his young career. Karasev played only 22 games last season for the Cavaliers, averaging a little more than seven minutes a game. But Kirilenko predicted he could find some more time in the Nets’ system.To Kirilenko’s amazement and amusement, this is the second time in two seasons that he will play alongside the son of a former teammate. Last season, Kirilenko noticed that one of the Nets’ young players, Toko Shengelia, shared a last name with a center, Kakha Shengelia, whom he had played with in the mid-1990s at Spartak St. Petersburg, his first professional team.“I said, ‘Toko, do you have an older brother?’ ” Kirilenko said. “He said no. So I’m like, ‘What about Kakha?’ And he’s like, ‘That’s my dad.’ ”Kirilenko, who cut most of his signature long hair on Friday, laughed and muttered an expletive under his breath.“That’s why I cut my hair,” he said. “I need to feel young.”