http://www.nytimes.com/2002/11/27/arts/design/27ARTS.html
ARTS ABROAD; From the Front, a Corner of Hell That Is Forever Lyrical - The New York Times
GREAT BRITAIN,IMPERIAL WAR MUSEUM,WORLD WAR I (1914-18),POETRY AND POETS,REVIEWS,BOOKS AND LITERATURE
Nov. 27, 2002
6513
Is tragedy less painful when presented in poignant verse? Does organized violence seem less futile when described in patriotic poetry? Today photography is considered by many to be the most effective way to convey the plight of war's combatants, victims and mourners. But during World War I it was through poetry that many Britons came to share the horror of life and death in the muddy trenches of northern France.The impact of that war poetry was enormous, and not only on those reading verse messages from the Western Front in newspapers. For hundreds of British soldiers, writing poetry released bitter feelings that would have caused consternation if expressed in letters home. Often scribbled in little notebooks by candlelight, many of these poems were not good enough to merit publication. Yet more than any war before or since, the memory of World War I lives on in Britain through poetry.To this day, every time Britons go to war, the opening lines of Rupert Brooke's 1914 poem, ''The Soldier,'' are remembered: ''If I should die, think only this of me:/That there's some corner of a foreign field/That is forever England.''Now, to coincide with the 84th anniversary of Armistice Day on Nov. 11, the Imperial War Museum here has organized the exhibition ''Anthem for Doomed Youth,'' which takes its name from the title of a poem by Wilfred Owen. The exhibition focuses on 12 soldier poets from World War I. A few of them -- notably Owen, Brooke, Robert Graves and Siegfried Sassoon -- are still read today. Others, like the Irish poet Francis Ledwidge, have been rediscovered thanks to the show, which runs through April 27.Each writer has his own small section, where handwritten or typed originals of poems are displayed beside brief biographies, photographs, letters and in some cases drawings, a uniform or pair of boots, locks of hair or a medal for bravery. In seven cases there are also the telegrams informing the poets' families of their deaths. Piano music by the composer and poet Ivor Gurney, who went mad after the war, plays softly in the background.The show's faintly hallowed ambience seems appropriate. ''In times of war and national calamity, large numbers of people seldom seen in church or bookshop will turn for consolation and inspiration to religion and poetry,'' Jon Stallworthy, a former professor of English literature at Oxford University, wrote in a book accompanying the show. ''Never was the interaction of these two more clearly demonstrated than in the Great War.''Few of these war poets made direct references to God, but it was taken for granted that God was on Britain's side. For instance, Brooke's ''Soldier'' was read in St. Paul's Cathedral on Easter Sunday 1915 as an example of what the dean of St. Paul's called ''pure and elevated patriotism.'' Further, as Mr. Stallworthy notes, ''many other poets, soldiers and civilians alike, found inspiration for their battle hymns, elegies and exhortations in 'Hymns Ancient and Modern,' '' of the Church of England.Still, the 12 poets in this exhibition were hardly typical soldiers. Eight were officers, six were Oxford or Cambridge graduates, and only one was a career soldier. Two, David Jones and Isaac Rosenberg, the diminutive descendant of Russian immigrants who was assigned to a bantam battalion, were also visual artists. Most joined the army as volunteers while in their 20's; Edward Thomas was married with children when he was killed in 1917 at 39.Their poetry varied in tone, with enthusiasm giving way to despair. Brooke, whose good looks had made him a pin-up poet before 1914, embraced the conflict with passion. In a letter to a friend, he wrote: ''Not a bad place to die, Belgium 1915. Better than coughing out a civilian soul amid bedclothes and disinfectant and gulping medicines in 1950. Come and die. It will be great fun.''Instead, Brooke died of blood poisoning in April 1915 on his way to fight in the Dardanelles, the strait joining the Sea of Marmara and the Aegean Sea. He was quickly enshrined as a romantic saint. The poet Charles H. Sorley, however, was one of Brooke's critics, noting the sentimentality of his work, and remarking that ''he is far too obsessed with his own sacrifice.''Sorley's view of the conflict was darker. A 1915 sonnet begins: ''Such, such is Death: no triumph: nodefeat:/Only an empty pail, a slate rubbed clean,/A merciful putting away of what has been.''Sorley was 20 when he was killed in October 1915. A poem was found in his kit bag that seemed to challenge the ''I'' of Brooke's ''Soldier.'' It begins: ''When you see millions of the mouthless dead/Across your dreams in pale battalions go,/Say not soft things as other men have said,/That you'll remember. For you need not so.''Ledwidge, the Irish poet who joined the British Army to fight ''an enemy common to our civilization,'' was appalled when Britain executed Irish nationalists after the 1916 Easter Rising, the republican insurrection in Ireland against the British government there. But he was still fighting on the Western Front when he was killed in July 1917. The opening lines of ''A Soldier's Grave'' captures the lyricism of his verse: ''Then in the lull of midnight, gentle arms/Lifted him slowly down the slopes of death,/Lest he should hear again the mad alarms/Of battle, dying moans, and painful breath.''Owen arrived in France in December 1916 and proved a valiant soldier, but six months later he returned to Britain because he suffered from shell shock. He was sent for psychiatric treatment to a Scottish hospital, where he became good friends with Sassoon, another recuperating poet. The exhibition displays the handwritten copy of Owen's poem ''Anthem for Doomed Youth,'' which shows changes made by Sassoon, including substituting ''doomed'' for ''dead'' in its title.Owen's pessimism is evident in this poem's opening lines: ''What passing-bells for these who die as cattle?/Only the monstrous anger of the guns,/Only the stuttering rifles' rapid rattle/Can patter out their hasty orisons.'' In a 1918 letter Owen wrote: ''Above all I am not concerned with Poetry. My subject is war, and the pity of war. The Poetry is in the pity.'' He died one week before the war ended. The telegram announcing his death reached his parents on Armistice Day.Meanwhile Sassoon issued an astonishing public protest, noting in part, ''I believe that this war, upon which I entered as a war of defense and liberation, has now become a war of aggression and conquest.'' He was saved from court-martial by friends, including Graves, who argued that he was unbalanced. Recognizing that his protest had failed, he rejoined his regiment in France and survived the war. Sassoon, who died in 1967, would later become best known for ''Memoirs of a Fox-Hunting Man'' and other volumes of his memoirs.While Graves also published his war memoirs, ''Goodbye to All That,'' he was alone among the surviving war poets to become a major 20th-century poet, dying in 1985 at 90. At the front in 1916, when 21, he showed his disgust with war in a poem called ''A Dead Boche'' (boche is a disrespectful French nickname for Germans), which ends: ''he scowled and stunk/With clothes and face a sodden green,/Big-bellied, spectacled, crop-haired,/Dribbling black blood from nose and beard.''Some of this poetry was published only after the war ended, and this kept alive the memory of a war in which 900,000 British Empire troops died, more than 19,000 of them on a single day, July 1, 1916, in the Battle of the Somme. In ''Prelude: The Troops,'' Sassoon remembered them: ''Battalions and battalions, scarred from hell;/The unreturning army that was youth;/The legions who have suffered and are dust.''