https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/16/world/asia/park-guen-hye-south-korea-kim-jong-un-north-korea.html
South Korean Leader Voices Alarm at Kim Jong-un’s ‘Reign of Terror’ - The New York Times
North Korea,South Korea,Park Geun-hye,Kim Jong-un,Hyon Yong-chol
May 15, 2015
4347
SEOUL, South Korea —  South Korea’s president on Friday warned that the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un’s “extreme reign of terror” and his government’s recent hostilities along the two countries’ disputed maritime border were raising uncertainty on the divided peninsula.“Many people are alarmed by the North’s recent provocative acts and as they learn of an extreme reign of terror within North Korea,” President Park Geun-hye said during a speech on Friday. “There is a growing concern among people over what might happen.”Ms. Park’s comments came two days after her spy agency, the National Intelligence Service, told South Korean lawmakers that Mr. Kim had one of his top generals, the minister of the People’s Armed Forces, Hyon Yong-chol, executed by an antiaircraft gun. North Korea also fired artillery shells near the disputed western sea border on Wednesday and Thursday.Ms. Park did not mention General Hyon by name, but his reported execution has dominated news coverage in South Korea since Wednesday.If the report is true, General Hyon would be the most prominent North Korean official purged since Mr. Kim executed his uncle, Jang Song-thaek, in late 2013. Mr. Jang was accused, among other things, of plotting a military coup and showing disrespect for his nephew during a political gathering by “unwillingly standing up from his seat and halfheartedly clapping.” On Wednesday, the National Intelligence Service said that one of the reasons Mr. Kim had General Hyon killed was that the 66-year-old dozed off during a meeting Mr. Kim presided over.During a closed-door parliamentary hearing and a separate briefing to local news outlets this week, South Korean intelligence officials said that more than 70 senior North Korean officials had been put to death since Mr. Kim took power in 2011. Without revealing the sources for their information, they also provided grisly details of the executions, like the use of antiaircraft guns and flamethrowers that they said had obliterated the bodies.But doubts have persisted in South Korea as to whether General Hyon has actually been executed. Unlike Mr. Jang’s execution, the purging of General Hyon has not been confirmed by the North. Some analysts suspect that the general may have been banished to a labor camp for re-education rather than having been put to death.Ms. Park voiced similar concerns about the uncertainty caused by Mr. Kim’s “reign of terror” after Mr. Jang’s execution. But some analysts say that the recent series of purges in North Korea do not necessarily indicate political trouble or instability in Mr. Kim’s government.Kim Dong-yup, an analyst at the University of North Korean Studies in Seoul, said that a “best-selling fiction” and “wishful thinking” were spreading in the South Korean news media, referring to speculation that reports of Mr. Kim’s tyranny might be signs of instability.Political purges were the norm rather than the exception in North Korea, he said. Whenever North Korea went through past upheavals, talk of a possible collapse of the North’s government gained currency in the South.“If such views were right, North Korea must have collapsed several times by now,” Mr. Kim said. “What’s happening in North Korea is extremely abnormal by our standards, but we also need to see the reign of terror not simply as a dictator raving mad, but rather as his carefully calculated choice.”