http://www.nytimes.com/1970/03/12/archives/500-rise-in-emphysema-mortality-rate-in-last-decade-reported-for.html
500% Rise in Emphysema Mortality Rate in Last Decade Reported for City - The New York Times
UNITED STATES,NEW YORK CITY METROPOLITAN AREA,WATER POLLUTION,MEDICINE AND HEALTH,AIR POLLUTION
March 12, 1970
7932
The fastest‐growing cause of death among New Yorkers is pulmonary emphysema, a mor tality rate that has risen 500 per cent in the last 10 years, according to the New York Tuberculosis and Health Asso ciation. During the same pe riods, the association says, deaths from chronic bronchitis have increased 200 per cent.A city medical examiner, talking of the health effects of air pollution, puts it more pungently.“On the autopsy table it's unmistakable,” he remarked the other day. “The person who spent his life in the Adiron dacks has nice pink lungs. The city dweller's are black as coal.”But despite such anatomical displays, and despite the over whelming statistical evidence that air pollution sickens and kills, there is little solid medical proof that specific pollutants normally found in the urban air cause specific diseases.This generality holds true not only for air pollution, but for the effects on human health of contaminated water and excess noise.The Public Health Service re ports, for instance, that deaths from lung cancer occur in large Metropolitan areas at twice the rural rate, even when allowance is made for differences in smoking habits. But no one has specifically identified what makes the difference.Yet Dr. Ernest Wynder of the Sloan‐Kettering Institute for Cancer Research. doubts that air pollution plays a major role in the growing incidence of lung cancer. Dr. that notes for one thing that lung cancer is six times as prevalent among Men as among women, though both are exposed equally to air       pollution.Some of the most intensive research into'the health effects of air pollution has been un dertaken by Dr. Stephen H. Ayres, director of the Cardio Pulmonary Laboratory at St. Vincent's Hospital here. But in an article soon to be published in a professional journal, Dr. Ayres acknowledges.“Ideally, one would like to identify the body burden of a given pollutant and beg in a position to measure the physiologic effects of that par ticular body burden. With most pollutants, neither the body burden nor the quantitative relationships between burden and health effects is known.”No tidy set of syrnptons acts as a signpost for the diagnosing physician, for in fact there is no “air pollution disease” as such. Among the experts, however, there is gen eral agreement that pollution's primary effect on health is to exacerbate a variety of exist ing diseases, such as arterios celerosis.Yet despite the lack of pre cise knowledge, experts have no doubt that air pollution is indeed a formidable hazard and that vigorous remedial measures are called for. Dr. Robert Horton, chief of the government's Health Effects Research Program, told the New Yorker in an interview a year ago:“The British reduced cholera and typhoid in the nineteenth century before they knew bac teria existed, and we may have to regulate our air supply be fore we have complete knowl edge about air pollution.“The methods we have for detecting excess deaths are so crude that there has to be pretty big excess for us to realize that it's there at all. What we do know is that peo ple get killed by air pollution, and I don't see any excuse for there being enough air pollu tion to kill people. Do you?”Those “excess deaths” occur most often in New York, whose air is the dirtiest in the ‘United States and second only to London's in the world. New York's average, of sulphur dioxide, for instance, is half again as high as that of Chi cago, its nearest American competitor.During the Thanksgiving weekend of 1966, severe smog caused by a temperature inver sion resulted in the deaths of 168 more New Yorkers than normally die in the same length of time.This figure was calculated by Dr. Leonard Greenburg, who was the city's first Commis sioner of Air Pollution Control and is now chairman of the Department of Environmental and Preventive Medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Med icine.Perhaps this country's most widely publicized episode came in 1948, when an inversion over Donora, Pa., a mill town of 14,000, made half the inhab itants sick with a four‐day, fog filled with sulfur dioxide and other pollutants from chemical and steel plants.Twenty Donora residents died during the siege. And a study made 10 years later showed that those who had been acutely ill during the episode were having a higher rate of sickness and were dying at an earlier age than other townspeople.In water pollution, public health officials are concerned with three types of contamina tion microbiological, chemical and radioactive. Generally, sep arate standards of purity are set for drinking water, shell fish waters and bathing beach water.The standard measure of mi crobiological contamination is the concentration of coliform bacteria. These are not a health hazard in themselves, but they are relatively easy to count and usually indicate the presence of pathogens, which are dis ease‐causing organisms.The New York City Health Department will not approve drinking water that contains more than 1 coliform bacillus per 100 milliliters (about ounces). A concentration of 700 is the maximum allowed for shellfish waters, and swimming beaches are closed when the concentration exceeds 2,400.The city's standard for swim ming water is the most lenient in the United States. The stand ard for shellfish waters is an academic one; all sea water within New York City contains more than the permissible con centration, and shellfishing has been prohibited here for years.The problem with shellfish is that their filtration systems collect contaminants and store them in much greater concen trations than exist in the sur rounding water. One study of oysters, for instance, showed them capable of storing radio activity in concentrations 1,000 times as great as the water's.The most common health hazard in contamined shellfish is infectious hepatitis, whose virus is carried in human feces. Huge quantities of untreated sewage are pumped into New York Harbor continually.Years ago, typhoid fever was a major threat from polluted water, and though the disease is rarely heard of in this coun try today, Deputy Health Com missioner Frederick S. Kent said the other day “I still don't rule out typhoid as a hazard.”A type of “pollution” that is relatively new to public health officials is excessive noise. In a report earlier this year, Mayor Lindsay's Task Force on Noise Control stated:“Noise has reached a level in tense, continuous and persistent enough to threaten basic com munity life.”A medical subcommittee of the task force, headed by Dr. Wilbur James Gould, reported that subway motormen and con ductors may suffer permanent hearing loss.Mr. Kent has classified en viromental pollution into a pri ority system of four categories: (1) concentrations that cause death, (2) amounts that cause illness or injury, (3) levels that permit “effective living” at work and play and (4) levels that permit “esthetic enjoy ment.”