http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/01/us/use-of-tasers-is-scrutinized-after-walter-scott-shooting.html
Use of Tasers Is Scrutinized After Walter Scott Shooting - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Stun Guns,Slager  Michael T (1981- ),Scott  Walter L (1950-2015),Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,North Charleston (SC),Black  Kip Darrell (1968-2006)
May 31, 2015
7346
NORTH CHARLESTON, S.C. —  It was late on a Sunday in May 2014 when Officer Michael T. Slager of the North Charleston Police Department stood outside an apartment and faced off with a man whose fists, he said, were clenched as he assumed an “aggressive stance.” Mr. Slager, who said he had just watched the man assault a roommate, forced him to the ground with a five-second burst of electricity from a Taser.The episode, documented in police records that were obtained through an open records request by The New York Times, was the second time in less than 24 hours that Mr. Slager had turned to his Taser while on patrol.About a year later, on April 4, Mr. Slager said he reached for his Taser before fatally shooting Walter L. Scott, a black man who fled a traffic stop.The records show that before the videotaped shooting of Mr. Scott, which led to Mr. Slager’s being charged with murder and fired, he used his Taser at least 14 times during his roughly five years as an officer.While the recording of Mr. Scott provided graphic documentation of a fatal police shooting, Mr. Slager’s career provides a glimpse into another issue that has been the subject of controversy, complaints and litigation here and in other cities: the frequent use of Tasers by police officers.Figures are scarce, and exact comparisons are hard to make about Taser use across cities and neighborhoods, but residents here, particularly blacks, say overuse of the device is a major concern. Of the 1,238 “various uses of force” that North Charleston officers employed from 2010 to 2014, Tasers were involved 825 times. In 2014, police records show, Mr. Slager used his Taser six times, about 4 percent of the Taser use that year by the department, which has over 340 sworn officers.Police officers in Houston — a city of two million people, compared with 104,000 here — deployed Tasers 1,284 times from December 2004 to June 2007, according to Mark P. Jones, a political science professor at Rice University. And from 2010 to 2014, the period when North Charleston officers used their Tasers 825 times, officers in Tyler, Tex. — a city similar in size but with about 150 fewer officers — deployed them 65 times.“They shoot people with Tasers for anything in South Carolina,” said Robert Phillips, a lawyer involved in a lawsuit that accused the North Charleston police of shooting and wounding a 17-year-old boy after an officer missed him with a Taser.Both Mr. Slager’s lawyer and a spokesman for the North Charleston police did not respond to requests for comment over the weekend.But in court documents and in the news media, the city has long defended its use of Tasers. In a 2009 court filing, lawyers for the city wrote: “Tasers are intended to be used as a nonlethal use of force.”In a 2006 article published in The Post and Courier about Taser use, North Charleston’s police chief at the time, Jon R. Zumalt, said he was “not worried about the effects of the Taser.”Taser International, the manufacturer of the electrical weapons, says more than 18,000 law enforcement agencies have purchased the devices, which are used about 900 times a day. Although Tasers have been credited with preventing many deaths, they have also been faulted as tools that are susceptible to misuse, researchers and law enforcement officials said.Amnesty International has blamed Tasers for more than 500 deaths, and critics say the jolts of electricity can exacerbate pre-existing medical conditions or prompt cardiac disturbances. The manufacturer says on its website that “numerous independent studies” have found Tasers to be “generally safe and effective.”North Charleston began using Tasers in 2005, the department said in a 2011 report, “to give patrol officers an intermediate weapon to reduce serious injuries to officers and suspects.” The report concluded that the Tasers had been “very effective” because most injuries to suspects in 2010 had been minor, and because no police officers had been hurt that year.The department had in recent years been buffeted by criticism about its Taser use. But bolstered by statistics about the absence of serious injuries, North Charleston stood by the weapons. From 2010 to 2011, after a committee recommended more training and updated policy changes about when to apply force, Taser use decreased by 21 percent.Under North Charleston’s current policy, officers may deploy their Tasers “when they are required to use physical force for protection from assault and/or take a person into custody.”Critics contend that there is a substantial gap between policy and practice around Tasers in North Charleston, where, in lawsuits, complaints and interviews, the Police Department and its officers were frequently accused of abusing the technology.“What I’ve found in practice is that it is used as a tool of retribution once they’re complying, being handcuffed or detained,” said John Gentry, a lawyer for a man who filed a lawsuit against Mr. Slager in April for an arrest involving a Taser last summer.Although the lawsuit attracted outsize attention because of Mr. Scott’s death, it was not the first formal complaint about North Charleston’s Taser use. A pair of 2008 lawsuits, which were ultimately dismissed or withdrawn, alleged that repeated uses of a Taser against Kip Black, a mentally disabled man, played a role in his 2006 death.In an interview in April, Mr. Black’s mother, Janie Mae Black, recounted feeling baffled that the police needed to use a Taser nine times to subdue an unarmed man who had been hospitalized weeks before, in part for mental illness.“He wasn’t bothering nobody,” she said of the afternoon in October 2006 when, according to one of the lawsuits, he spun himself around a light pole and then began chewing on his identification card in front of police officers. “He was going through whatever he was going through. They tased him to death.”In one of the lawsuits, lawyers for the city and for the Police Department denied that the officers who had apprehended Mr. Black used excessive force. The lawyers said in court documents that Mr. Black’s cocaine ingestion had caused his death and that although several officers had tried to use their Tasers on Mr. Black, only one had been working appropriately, and it “did not have too much effect.”Other Taser episodes have also led to litigation, including one in June 2006 when a white North Charleston officer fired his Taser into the back of a black woman, Paula B. Pete, who said she had been walking away from the officer and posed no threat.According to Ms. Pete, officers stopped her son outside her house and arrested him for playing loud music, driving without headlights and violating the terms of his learner’s driving permit. When Ms. Pete arrived at her house, one of the officers, Dante F. Ghi, angrily told her to get inside, she said. She was walking up her driveway, trying to get her other children into the house, when Officer Ghi fired two electrified barbs into her back, she said.“I just felt boom, boom,” said Ms. Pete, who was arrested and accused of interfering with police and resisting arrest. “I fell on the ground. It shocks you. It hurts you. It shivers your body. It makes your heart beat fast. All your life is out of you for a good five, maybe 10 minutes. You’re looking around like, ‘Oh, God, what just happened to me?’ ”Ms. Pete later filed a lawsuit, but it was dismissed because it fell outside the statute of limitations. In municipal court, she was acquitted of the two charges under which she was arrested.Sandra Jane Senn, a lawyer who represented the city and Officer Ghi in Ms. Pete’s lawsuit, as well as the city and the Police Department in the lawsuits filed by the relatives of Mr. Black, declined to comment.Not every allegation of Taser abuse in North Charleston has provoked litigation. Instead, such accusations are often subjects of neighborhood grumbling and discontent, like the case of a handcuffed man who was twice struck with a Taser.The man, who is black and who asked that his name not be used because he feared retaliation from the police, was stopped by a white officer outside a store for jaywalking. Skeptical about why he was stopped, he refused to cooperate, and he said he fled after the officer fired the Taser at him the first time. But he did not get far, he said, and passed out from the effects of the weapon. When he woke up, he said, the officer used the Taser on him twice more while he was on the ground in handcuffs.“They don’t know how to control their anger and their adrenaline,” the man said. “I don’t see why I was being a threat trying to get away from him.”Geoffrey P. Alpert, a criminology professor at the University of South Carolina who researches police use of force, said there was no publicly available national data or national standard for Taser use among law enforcement agencies. Often, officers’ Taser use will depend on the crime levels of the neighborhoods they patrol and other factors, such as their skills in defusing tense situations. One veteran officer in another state said he had used his Taser once in eight years.Michael Leonesio, who developed a training program for Taser use as an officer in the Police Department in Oakland, Calif., said the weapons, when used carefully, can neutralize suspects without putting them at risk of more than minor injuries.“When they’re effective, they’re very effective,” he said. “It definitely stops the resistance, or the fight or flight immediately. The person goes to the ground. It is an efficient weapon.”But, he added, in smaller police departments that lean on Taser International for guidance and fail to develop stringent training policies, they become much more dangerous, used for a wide range of suspects and on parts of the body that increase health risks.“They just leave it up to officers to do things on the street,” said Mr. Leonesio, who has also worked with the National Institute of Standards and Technology to develop standards for testing electroshock weapons.Taser use by North Charleston officers has contributed to comparisons of the department with another troubled agency, the Police Department in Ferguson, Mo. The United States Department of Justice, in a disputed report that found widespread misconduct and unconstitutional practices by the Ferguson police, criticized the city’s officers for relying on their Tasers “where less force — or no force at all — would do.”Professor Alpert said Tasers could be effective tools when used properly, but he cautioned that many officers in the United States had come to rely on them excessively.“I am often told by officers, ‘We had no choice,’ ” Professor Alpert said. “And to which I respond, ‘What do you think the police did before Tasers?’ ”