http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/06/world/asia/south-korean-government-seeks-ban-of-small-leftist-party.html
South Korean Government Seeks  Ban on Small Leftist Party - The New York Times
Park Geun-hye,United Progressive Party (South Korea),South Korea,North Korea
Nov. 5, 2013
4374
SEOUL, South Korea — The government of President Park Geun-hye asked the Constitutional Court of South Korea Tuesday to disband a small leftist party accused of supporting North Korea at the cost of the South’s national security.Since its founding in late 2011, the United Progressive Party has been the lightning rod for criticism from Ms. Park’s conservative Saenuri Party. Several of its key members, including the lawmaker Lee Seok-ki, were arrested in September on charges of plotting an armed rebellion against the South Korean government in the event of war on the divided Korean Peninsula.The government’s decision was adopted at a cabinet meeting on Tuesday and quickly endorsed by Ms. Park, who was on a visit to Europe. It is the first lawsuit of its kind. No political party in South Korea has been shut down by the government or a court decision since Syngman Rhee, South Korea’s dictatorial founding president, forced the closure of a leftist party in 1958.“The platform of the United Progressive Party pursues a North Korean-style socialism,” Justice Minister Hwang Kyo-ahn said at a news conference. “We determined that its activities, such as a treason plot by its core elements, followed North Korea’s strategy to revolutionize the South.”By law, the Constitutional Court can disband a political party if six or more of its nine justices agree that the party “violated the basic democratic order.” It remained unclear whether the six lawmakers affiliated with the United Progressive Party will lose parliamentary membership if their party is disbanded.Lee Jung-hee, head of the party, the country’s third-largest, accused Ms. Park of returning to the dictatorship of her late father, President Park Chung-hee. During Mr. Park’s iron-fisted rule from 1961 to 1979, dissidents were tortured and sometimes executed on charges of plotting against South Korea on the North’s behalf, but the charges were often thrown out in retrials in a democratized South Korea decades later.“This is a rude anti-democratic violation of the Constitution, which guarantees the freedom of political activities,” Ms. Lee said. “This is a blatant and shameless political revenge.”Ever since Ms. Park took office in February, South Korean politics have been rocked by a series of ideologically driven political scandals.A former head of the National Intelligence Service is now on trial on charges he ran a team of state intelligence agents that carried out an online smear campaign against Ms. Park’s rivals ahead of the presidential election last December, calling them servants of North Korea. The scandal pushed Ms. Park and her conservative ruling party into a corner.Opposition lawmakers accused Ms. Park and her party of trying to divert attention from her election scandal by moving against the minor United Progressive Party, first with the arrest of its members on highly unusual charges of treason and now with a lawsuit to disband their party.The recent scandals showed that South Korean politics remains deeply divided and volatile over North Korea six decades after the Korean War of 1950-53 ended without a peace treaty. They also raised questions about how freely people can talk about North Korea in the South, where the government blocks access to North Korean websites and people are still arrested for resending Twitter posts of North Korean propaganda materials.The United Progressive Party, with six seats, represents a minor force in the 299-member National Assembly. The main opposition party regarded it as too radical and kept it at a distance.But the political firestorm over its fate reflects a larger struggle between liberals and conservatives in South Korea. The liberals stress the “nation” and reconciliation with North Korea, while the conservatives place anti-Communism at the center of their identity. The strife between the two camps intensified with the election of Ms. Park, whose father remains a godlike father figure among conservatives.Some of the United Progressive Party members feared that if there were another war on the peninsula, conservatives would round up leftists for mass executions, “as Jews were once rounded up,” according to the transcript of a secret meeting of party members in May that was submitted to the court for the trial of party members on treason charges. Avoiding such a fate was cited as one of the reasons of plotting an armed rebellion.The far left party’s platform calls for “rectifying our nation’s shameful history tainted by imperialist invasions, the national divide, military dictatorship, the tyranny and plunder of transnational monopoly capital and chaebol,” the latter referring to South Korea’s giant family-controlled business conglomerates which began expanding its influence under Ms. Park’s father. The party wants to end the American military presence, dismantle South Korea’s “subordinate alliance with the United States” and unify the North and the South.The conservative ruling party has long accused members of the United Progressive Party of subscribing to North Korea’s ideology of juche, or self-reliance, and has called for its disbandment.The leftist party also included the most vocal critics of Ms. Park. At a televised presidential debate in December, its head, Ms. Lee, blew the lid off a taboo among South Korean conservatives: mentioning the Japanese name of Mr. Park, who served as a lieutenant in the Japanese imperial army in Manchuria during Japan’s colonial rule of Korea from 1910 to 1945. Although Mr. Park is widely revered by conservative South Koreans for building the Korean economy, his colonial-era record remains a political handicap for his daughter in South Korea, where the sense of being wronged by Japan remains an essential part of national identity and being labeled pro-Japanese is sometimes a worse accusation than being pro-North Korean.“Takaki Masao, the man who wrote his allegiance to Japan in blood and became an officer of the Japanese army: Do you know who he is? His Korean name is Park Chung-hee,” Ms. Lee said. “You can’t hide your roots.”