http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/24/nyregion/prosecutor-wont-seek-prison-for-peter-liang-ex-officer-convicted-in-killing.html
Prosecutor Won’t Seek Prison for Peter Liang, Ex-Officer Convicted in Killing - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Thompson  Kenneth P,Liang  Peter (1987- ),Gurley  Akai,Sentences (Criminal),Brooklyn (NYC),New York City
March 23, 2016
7376
The Brooklyn district attorney’s office announced on Wednesday that it would not seek prison time for the former New York City police officer convicted last month in the fatal shooting of an unarmed man in a housing project in East New York.In a statement, the district attorney, Ken Thompson, said the case was about “justice and not about revenge,” and urged that the former officer, Peter Liang, receive five years of probation, including six months of home confinement, when he is sentenced next month.Mr. Liang, 28, who was convicted of second-degree manslaughter, could be sentenced to as much as 15 years in prison.“Mr. Liang has no prior criminal history and poses no future threat to public safety,” Mr. Thompson said. “Because his incarceration is not necessary to protect the public, and due to the unique circumstances of this case, a prison sentence is not warranted.”The statement, which was accompanied by a formal sentencing letter filed with the court, is only a recommendation to Justice Danny K. Chun of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, who presided over Mr. Liang’s trial and is scheduled to sentence the former officer on April 14.The announcement by Mr. Thompson’s office stirred the emotions and divisions that have marked the case.Mr. Liang and his partner were on patrol in a stairwell in the Louis H. Pink Houses on Nov. 20, 2014, when Mr. Liang’s gun fired and a ricocheting bullet struck and killed Akai Gurley, a 28-year-old black man who was visiting his girlfriend.The killing of Mr. Gurley came barely four months after an another unarmed black man, Eric Garner, died in a confrontation with police officers on Staten Island, and the two deaths pulled New York into a national debate over race and the criminal justice system. At the same time, the indictment and prosecution of Mr. Liang, who is of Chinese heritage, created an uproar among Chinese-American residents of the city who said he was being made a scapegoat for larger problems in American policing.A little more than more than a year after Mr. Gurley’s death, a state grand jury indicted Mr. Liang on charges that included manslaughter. He was convicted on Feb. 11, and subsequently fired by the Police Department.On Wednesday, Mr. Gurley’s family denounced the prosecutor’s decision.“We are outraged at District Attorney Thompson’s inadequate sentencing recommendation,” the family said in a statement released by Mandela Jones of Communities United for Police Reform. “Officer Liang was convicted of manslaughter and should serve time in prison for his crime. This sentencing recommendation sends the message that police officers who kill people should not face serious consequences.”In a statement, Mr. Liang’s lawyers, Paul Shechtman and Gabriel Chin, said, “Although we disagree with Mr. Thompson on the fundamental issue of Peter Liang’s culpability, he deserves praise for his dispassionate and courageous decision that incarceration is not called for in this case.”In his sentencing letter, Mr. Thompson wrote that Mr. Liang’s actions had “tragic and irreparable consequences,” but he also noted that there was no evidence that Mr. Liang had intended to kill or even injure Mr. Gurley.Scott Rynecki, a lawyer for Kimberly Ballinger, Mr. Gurley’s domestic partner, said that while the district attorney’s office had been able to do what others rarely had — obtain the conviction of a police officer in the fatal shooting of an innocent man — the recommendation for no prison time did not diminish the “message that police are going to be held accountable for committing a wrongful act.”“He’s still asking for a significant sentence,” Mr. Rynecki said of Mr. Thompson.Patrick J. Lynch, president of the Patrolmen’s Benevolent Association, the city’s main police union, said the case against Mr. Liang should not have been brought in the first place. “The reasons cited by the D.A. for justifying no jail time in this tragedy are the very same reasons that the officer should not have been indicted,” Mr. Lynch said.Edward Mullins, president of the Sergeants Benevolent Association, who had also disagreed with Mr. Thompson for seeking an indictment of Mr. Liang, said the decision not to seek jail time was correct.“Of course, Officer Liang shouldn’t be in jail,” Mr. Mullins said in a statement. “He never should have been convicted.”Lumumba Akinwole-Bandele, a senior organizer for the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund who attended much of the trial, said he was disappointed by Mr. Thompson’s decision and concerned about “the devaluation of black and brown lives.”“I think if the shoe were on the other foot” — if a civilian had accidentally killed a police officer — “it would be highly unlikely we would having this conversation,” Mr. Akinwole-Bandele said.That sentiment was echoed by Johnetta Elzie, a founder of Campaign Zero, an advocacy group affiliated with the Black Lives Matter movement, which focuses on ending police violence. “Could you imagine a sentence or recommendation for a regular civilian?” Ms. Elzie asked. “Or if Akai had shot and killed Peter? Skewed is not a strong enough word for what happened today.”Ms. Elzie then added: “This is not what justice looks like.”Many in the city’s Chinese-American community applauded the decision.“I am very pleased with the tone of Ken Thompson’s statement,” said Douglas Lee, a member of the Greater New York Coalition for Supporting Peter Liang. “Right now I just hope that the judge makes sure that this young man does not get punished for an accident.”New York police officers are rarely indicted by grand juries, much less put on trial, for deaths they cause in the line of duty. The most recent officer to be convicted of a line-of-duty killing was Bryan Conroy, who in 2005 was found guilty of criminally negligent homicide in the fatal shooting of an unarmed African immigrant, Ousmane Zongo. In that case, a State Supreme Court judge sentenced Officer Conroy to five years of probation, a sentence similar to what Mr. Thompson recommended for Mr. Liang.From the start, there was intense pressure on Mr. Thompson to pursue some sort of legal action against Mr. Liang, in part because the case came after a Staten Island grand jury declined to indict Officer Daniel Pantaleo in Mr. Garner’s death.After a trial in which prosecutors took great pains to present Mr. Liang’s conduct as criminal, Mr. Thompson, in his sentencing letter, struck a less harsh tone, listing several circumstances that mitigated recommending a prison term. He wrote, for example, that Mr. Liang was a rookie officer who had graduated from the Police Academy only a year before; that the stairwell he was patrolling was dark; and that he had chosen to put his own life on the line as a police officer.But Mr. Thompson made a point of recognizing the pain the shooting had caused Mr. Gurley’s loved ones. “At the sentencing proceeding on April 14, 2016,” he wrote, “Mr. Gurley’s family and friends will describe to the court the devastating effect that the loss of this young man has had on their lives.”