http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/14/world/europe/fighting-over-the-rock.html
Feud Over Gibraltar’s Sovereignty Fosters an Economic Squeeze - The New York Times
Gibraltar,Spain,Great Britain,European Sovereign Debt Crisis (2010- ),Economic Conditions and Trends,Labor and Jobs
Sept. 13, 2013
6527
GIBRALTAR —  Since Spain introduced tighter border checks as part of a tit-for-tat feud over the sovereignty of this British territory at the tip of Spain, Lola Ballesteros Benítez’s commute has become a lot harder.To avoid sometimes hourlong waits at the crossing, Ms. Ballesteros Benítez, an assistant nurse who lives in the Spanish port city of Algeciras but works in Gibraltar, has been parking her car nearby and walking across the border, before taking a bus. When she works nights, and the buses do not run, she takes a taxi, adding to her costs. What used to be a 45-minute commute is now a journey of at least two hours, she said.“I don’t think the government in Madrid realizes just how much harm can be done to some of its own citizens,” she said.Indeed, the dispute among Spain, Britain and Gibraltar has threatened an economic lifeline for Ms. Ballesteros Benítez and about 7,000 other Spaniards who cross the border daily to work within the confines of this 2.6-square-mile promontory — dominated by the Rock of Gibraltar — where the economy grew 8 percent last year. It is one of the few places in Europe to have emerged unscathed from the financial crisis.By contrast, unemployment averages 40 percent among the 267,000 inhabitants in the towns closest to Gibraltar — known collectively as the Campo de Gibraltar — about 13 percentage points above the already high average levels of joblessness in the rest of Spain.“Politicians can claim sovereignty and threaten each other, but everybody who actually lives around Gibraltar can see that we need each other,” said Yolanda Argüet, who works for a shoe retailer in Gibraltar. “Of course, I would much prefer to be working in my own country, but that’s not really possible now.”Four years ago, Ms. Argüet lost her job managing ticket sales for Madrid’s bull ring. She then returned to her native town, La Linea de la Concepción, just across the border from Gibraltar, but eventually found work here instead.“How is anybody supposed to get a job in La Linea when even the town hall cannot pay its staff?” she asked. La Linea’s indebted town hall owes its 750 employees the equivalent of 10 months of salary payments.Gibraltar officials, meanwhile, pride themselves on their economic resilience. An economy that was once reliant on British military spending has managed, according to Gibraltar officials, to combine an offshore tax system with a trustworthy British legal system to attract investors and become a hub for online gambling, fund management and other financial and legal services.“Gibraltar has had to reinvent itself a number of times, but now we’re certainly in an extremely good position,” said Christian Hernandez, the president of Gibraltar’s Chamber of Commerce.The spark for the current tensions came when Gibraltar restricted Spanish fishermen’s access to its waters by building a concrete reef. Spain retaliated with the tighter border controls. But the sources of the tensions run far deeper.Britain secured control of Gibraltar in the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht. To this day, Britain handles Gibraltar’s defense and international relations, while Gibraltar’s own government has significant autonomy over trade and industry issues, as well as the ability to set its own taxes.Spain has recently questioned whether Gibraltar’s wealth reflects not so much its astute economic management as its willingness to turn a blind eye to dodgy activities like money laundering, tax evasion and tobacco smuggling. Spain is even considering imposing sanctions against Gibraltar over bunkering — whereby ships avoid docking costs and instead refuel and change crew off Gibraltar’s coast — asserting that such a practice raised the risk of an oil spill close to Spanish shores.This month, in a speech delivered in Parliament, José Manuel García-Margallo, Spain’s foreign minister, said that Gibraltar had built up the world’s fourth-richest economy per capita at the expense of Spain and thanks to an offshore economic model based on “deregulation, opacity and low taxation.”European inspectors are due to visit Gibraltar this month, after both Britain and Spain called on the European Commission, the European Union’s executive agency, to verify some of their conflicting claims. Britain wants the European Union to put an immediate end to Spain’s tougher border checks; the Spanish government is demanding the removal of the concrete reef. The commission, however, has so far not yielded to Spain’s demands for a broader review of Gibraltar’s offshore economy.Still, Spain has been justifying stricter border checks as an attempt to stop illegal tobacco trafficking out of the territory, where cigarettes are taxed at a much lower rate than in Spain. Gibraltar imported 139 million packs of cigarettes last year, even though it has only about 30,000 residents.Gibraltar’s government acknowledges that Gibraltar benefits from tax differences with Spain, particularly for retail items like cigarettes, but “in every single border town in the world there is some leverage on the pricing of certain items,” Albert Isola, Gibraltar’s minister for financial services, said in an interview.Mr. Isola warned that Spanish economic sanctions violate European Union legislation that guarantees the free movement of people and goods within the 28-nation bloc. “You cannot unilaterally decide to strangle people by creating eight-hour queues,” he said in reference to the lines of vehicles that have been forming at Gibraltar’s border.Like many others in Gibraltar, Mr. Isola suggested that the Spanish government of Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy had revived Spanish resentment over Britain’s 300-year-old control over Gibraltar in order to divert domestic attention away from more serious concerns.While struggling to pull Spain out of recession, Mr. Rajoy and other senior officials from his governing Popular Party have recently become entangled in a major corruption case, accused by their party’s former treasurer of receiving illegal payments from a slush fund.“Spain has created a situation that has actually nothing to do with Gibraltar,” Mr. Isola said. As a case in point, Mr. Isola said that even Spain’s arguments about its fishing rights had been blown out of proportion, because Gibraltar’s government had identified only one Spanish fishing boat, the Divina Providencia, that was reliant on fishing in the contested area.However, Francisco Gómez, the owner of that boat, said about 30 Spanish vessels fished regularly in the area.“If Gibraltar’s government has a problem with ours, why make weak Spanish fishermen pay for it?” he said. The day that Gibraltar removes the concrete reef, he added, “I’m ready to hoist Gibraltar’s flag on my boat.”The political dispute has gone far beyond discussing a controversial fishing zone. In his appearance before Spanish lawmakers this month, Mr. García-Margallo, the foreign minister, called Gibraltar “a national priority” and drew a comparison with the Falkland Islands, promising that Spain would support any United Nations resolution brought by Argentina to regain control of that British territory.Bringing the Falklands conflict into the equation has helped ensure that “Spain will never even get one stone of Gibraltar, because no British politician wants to be reminded that people were killed to defend the Falklands,” said Solomon Levy, a former civic mayor of Gibraltar and a member of its 800-strong Jewish community.While residents of Gibraltar have been applauding the firm stance taken by Britain and their own politicians toward Spain and attaching flags to their balconies as a sign of support, some also deplore feeling more cut off from Spain, where many have family and own weekend homes.Joe Galliano, a 66-year-old former factory worker, and his wife stopped going to Spain in early August because of concerns about the lengthy lines at the border. Until then, they had spent about 400 pounds a month in Spain, eating out as well as visiting a veterinarian for their Old English sheepdog, which wears a British flag as a neck scarf.“Gibraltar has always been seen in Spain as a problem and not as an opportunity,” said Gemma Araujo, the Socialist mayor of La Linea, who is opposed to the border restrictions imposed by the conservative government in Madrid. “When that thinking changes, no doubt the economies on both sides will benefit.”