https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/13/world/asia/bill-richardson-aids-effort-to-free-student-held-in-north-korea.html
Bill Richardson Aids Effort to Free Student Held in North Korea - The New York Times
North Korea,Warmbier  Otto Frederick (1994- ),Richardson  Bill,Kasich  John R,United States International Relations,University of Virginia,Ohio
Feb. 12, 2016
5302
Gov. John Kasich of Ohio has asked former Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico, a veteran diplomat and North Korea troubleshooter, to help in the effort to free an Ohioan arrested by the North Korean authorities six weeks ago, Mr. Kasich’s spokesman said Friday.Mr. Richardson confirmed the request and said he had begun making inquiries about the detained man, Otto F. Warmbier, a 21-year-old college student.The spokesman for Mr. Kasich, Rob Nichols, said the contact with Mr. Richardson was part of a broader effort by the Ohio governor to take action on behalf of Mr. Warmbier, who was arrested Jan. 2 as he was completing an organized tour of North Korea.Mr. Nichols said Mr. Kasich, a Republican presidential candidate, also had spoken with Mr. Warmbier’s parents and with officials at the White House.The Warmbier family, which lives in Cincinnati, has said it is declining to comment on the arrest. State Department officials also declined to comment.North Korea’s ballistic missile and nuclear arms programs have been widely criticized and could lead to toughened United Nations sanctions and the deployment of an American antimissile defense system in South Korea. The North Korean authorities are especially antagonistic toward the United States, which does not have diplomatic relations with North Korea and relies on Swedish diplomats to represent its interests there.Mr. Richardson, who has traveled to North Korea several times on diplomatic missions that include the release of American prisoners, said that he had been learning more about the arrest of Mr. Warmbier and that “Kasich called me right after he was captured.” Mr. Richardson said he could not comment further.Mr. Warmbier, an economics major at the University of Virginia, had participated in a trip organized by Young Pioneer Tours, a China-based travel business that advertises itself as a specialist in “budget tours to destinations your mother would rather you stayed away from.”News of the arrest of Mr. Warmbier was first reported Jan. 22 by North Korean state news media, which said he had been detained for an unspecified “hostile act.”Young Pioneer Tours said in a statement at the time that it had not publicized the arrest because its main concern had been to “follow the instructions laid down to us by relevant agencies and to do what was in the best interests of Otto and his family.”The statement said that Mr. Warmbier’s arrest had been “the first incident of its kind to ever occur on one of our trips.”North Korea has arrested several Americans in recent years, accusing them of illegal entry, spying, spreading Christian beliefs and other crimes deemed subversive. The State Department has strongly recommended against all travel by Americans to the country.It remains unclear whether Mr. Warmbier has been granted any consular visits. A denial of access to him would be highly unusual six weeks into his arrest.Swedish diplomats in Washington referred inquiries to the State Department, where the spokesman, John Kirby, said in a statement that “the welfare of U.S. citizens is one of the department’s highest priorities,” but that he could not comment further because of privacy considerations.