http://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/podcasts/the-daily/the-daily-donald-trump-jrs-deadline.html
‘The Daily’: Donald Trump Jr.’s Deadline - The New York Times
The Daily
July 12, 2017
2670
Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via StitcherIt was Tuesday morning. The New York Times had emails between Donald Trump Jr. and a trusted intermediary about setting up a meeting to discuss information that “would incriminate Hillary and her dealings with Russia and would be very useful to your father.”The reporters working on the article called Donald Trump Jr. for comment, telling him that he had until 11 a.m. to comment. An hour before that deadline, he gave a statement — on Twitter and to the world.On today’s episode:• Matt Apuzzo, one of the reporters who has been investigating the ties between the Trump campaign and Russia, discusses unearthing Donald Trump Jr.’s emails and demystifies the term “collusion.”• We hear from Rukmini Callimachi and her producer, Andy Mills, as they travel through the streets of Mosul in the hours after the Iraqi government declared victory over Islamic State militants.Background reading:• Russian dirt on Clinton? “I love it,” Donald Trump Jr. said in an email.• Photographs of what ISIS left behind in Mosul.Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb.If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.On your iPhone or iPad:Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “The Daily.”)Once you’re on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)On your Android phone or tablet:You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)From a desktop or laptop:Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”On Google Home:You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times news” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”