http://www.nytimes.com/1997/07/01/world/year-of-the-trojan-horse.html
Year of the Trojan Horse - The New York Times
HONG KONG,GREAT BRITAIN,CHINA,POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT
July 1, 1997
651
As dawn rises for the first time over red Chinese flags officially fluttering here in a capitalist breeze, the most fascinating question is not how China will change Hong Kong but how Hong Kong will change China -- and the world beyond.At stake is not just the fate of the 6.3 million people who live here but, more important, the 1.2 billion neighbors next door in China, plus the 20 million who live in Taiwan and the hundreds of millions more who live elsewhere in the region.To an enormous extent, many of the critical issues of the 21st century will depend in part on how events unfold in this peculiar crossroads of scones and dim sum.Whether the United States and China are headed for partnership or for conflict, whether Taiwan will eventually become independent or return to China's embrace, whether China will grow strong and democratic or collapse in chaos -- all these will be determined in part by what happens in Hong Kong.The central question is whether Hong Kong amounts to a colossal Trojan horse: a prize so glorious that China's Communists cannot leave it outside the gates but which, once inside, will destroy those in power.Indeed, looking at the way Hong Kong and China have influenced each other in the last dozen years, one could easily conclude that the hand-wringing over Hong Kong's future is misplaced. No one has ever made money betting against Hong Kong, though many have tried, and perhaps it is the Chinese Communist Party leaders who should tremble about whether their style of life and leadership can long survive.''I think the democratic struggle of people here in Hong Kong for freedom and human rights will influence China,'' mused Han Dongfang, a Chinese labor leader who was imprisoned for trying to organize an independent union during the 1989 Tiananmen democracy movement and is now in exile in Hong Kong. ''The Hong Kong handover will push the system in China and make the change go forward faster.''Mr. Han and others suggest that many mainland Chinese will be frustrated that their fellow Chinese citizens in Hong Kong have the right to criticize the Communist Party, to demonstrate, to form independent unions, while they themselves have none of these rights. For his part, Mr. Han thinks this gap will sow discontent throughout China.''Chinese workers will think that 'one country, two systems' means 'one country, two classes of citizens,' '' Mr. Han said. ''I think this will have a big impact.''The notion that tiny Hong Kong could reshape China is conceivable only because Hong Kong arguably has always been more important as an idea than as a place. For decades it has served as an example of prosperity and a model of economic and political laissez-faire, a catalyst for troubling reflections.''How was it that foreigners, the Englishmen, could do so much as they had done with the barren rock of Hong Kong within 70 or 80 years, while in 4,000 years China had no place like Hong Kong,'' Sun Yat-sen, one of the founders of modern China, asked in a commencement speech in Hong Kong in 1923.Hong Kong's influence over China has never been greater than in the last 20 years. In many ways it was the example of Hong Kong's success that helped inspire China to launch its ''second revolution,'' which since 1978 has transformed the most populous nation on earth.Tiny Hong Kong furnishes 58 percent of the foreign investment in China. But, more important, by its very existence and success it undermined the legitimacy of China's old economic system and ideology. In a nation that under Maoism was a moral monolith, Hong Kong suddenly emerged as a separate wellspring of legitimacy and an alternative arbiter of fashion and relevancy.The image of the Communist Party is of earnest old men sitting in Mao jackets holding self-criticism sessions. The image of Hong Kong is of young people in silk and linen, speaking on cellular phones as they drive off to dates. It is no wonder that the Communist Party is in trouble.Now many people expect that Hong Kong will continue to reshape China, but from within.''A China with us in its belly is not the same as a China without us,'' wrote Nury Vittachi, a columnist for The South China Morning Post. ''The best analogy I can think of is that Hong Kong is a bran tablet. These things are small and inoffensive when you take them, but they kind of invisibly expand in your stomach when they are in there, and have a beneficial effect.''Yet while the impact of Hong Kong, and of time, may well be corrosive to traditional Communist Party ideology and dictatorship, it could help stimulate a revitalization of the party and of China itself.''It is quite possible that out of this process will emerge not a weaker Chinese state but a stronger Chinese state, a state that is strengthened by having a greater sense of legitimacy, led by people who are more cosmopolitan and more responsive to the yearnings of their people,'' said Michel Oksenberg, an Asia expert at Stanford University.''The Communist Party is an institution that in my opinion does need revitalization,'' he said. ''But in a curious way, the absorption of Hong Kong could help revitalize it. It could also prompt its decay.''Still, not everyone thinks that Hong Kong will have much impact on China's political system, in part because the Chinese leadership is so adamant about stopping the buds of political pluralism before they even sprout.''Hong Kong will change China,'' said Robin Munro, the head of the Hong Kong office of Human Rights Watch. ''I'm sure we'll see more venality and appetite for money-making. But I doubt that this means more democracy and liberalism. My biggest anxiety is that I believe that China will probably change some of the assumptions of political science in the West.'' The theory that economic liberalization leads to political pluralism may be valid in much of the world, Mr. Munro said, but perhaps not in Asia.Most analysts predict that China in 20 years' time will look more like Hong Kong today than Hong Kong will look like China today -- economically, politically or socially -- but some point to history as a warning of a more unsettling possibility.With its gray, dilapidated buildings, the eastern Chinese port of Weihai today looks just like any other Chinese city, and that is precisely why it is a nightmare for people in Hong Kong.Britain acquired the port, then known as Weihaiwei, in 1898 at the same time that it gained the biggest chunk of Hong Kong, the New Territories. For the next few decades, it was a flourishing British enclave, a modest version of Hong Kong.Then in 1930, Britain returned Weihai to China, after getting guarantees that China would give the enclave special status and autonomy. Those guarantees proved worthless, and Chinese officials soon canceled Weihai's status as a free port and raised taxes. Investors fled, and it was quickly swallowed up by the immensity of China without leaving even a ripple behind.The handover of Hong Kong will also reverberate across the Taiwan Strait, with far-reaching implications for all of East Asia.Some Chinese officials have said that as the country recovers Hong Kong this year and the nearby Portuguese enclave of Macao in 1999, it must now focus on the final act of national reunification: the merger with Taiwan.So some experts fear that Beijing will become more impatient with Taiwan, perhaps eventually using military force to settle the issue once and for all. If Hong Kong thrives, China's leaders will undoubtedly argue that they are the reasonable ones and that it is Taiwan's rulers who are being petty and paranoid, perhaps leading Western countries to put pressure on Taiwan to discuss a return to Beijing's rule.''That's the nightmare scenario for the Taiwanese,'' said Steven M. Goldstein, a China scholar at Smith College.Concerned about that possibility, Taiwan officials go out of their way to emphasize that they are not ready to follow Hong Kong down the aisle.''Hong Kong is no precedent for Taiwan, even if 'one country, two systems' can work, and that's a big if,'' said Parris Chang, a member of Taiwan's legislature.Mr. Chang added that while success in Hong Kong would not lead to reunification any time soon, failure would have historic implications. ''If Hong Kong goes badly,'' he said, ''any chance that China may have of appealing to Taiwan for peaceful reunification will be gone forever.''Developments in Hong Kong will also shape relations between China and the West, particularly with the United States and Britain. Human rights in Hong Kong are already emerging as another focal point for United States-China relations, and any crackdown there could trigger a serious downward spiral in relations between Washington and Beijing.In the United States, the public and Congress already react angrily to suppression of freedoms in Tibet or Beijing, and the recriminations are sure to be incomparably greater if the people dragged off to prison are not unknown workers but the likes of Martin C. M. Lee, the distinguished Hong Kong lawyer and democracy campaigner who has held discussions with President Clinton at the White House.Yet for all the exploration of worst-case scenarios that is common these days, another possibility is that Beijing will keep its hands off Hong Kong and that the territory will thrive as a Chinese city. That would soothe Chinese-American relations and make it easier for Washington and Beijing to cooperate in addressing fundamental challenges of the next century.''Hong Kong can project to the world a very different kind of China,'' Professor Goldstein said, ''a China that is willing to tolerate different groups of Chinese, a China that is willing to keep its word, a China that is willing to allow the people of Hong Kong, within limits, to carve out their own lives. If a vibrant, pluralist kind of society begins to emerge, I think that that's going to change people's views of what China is.''