https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/05/world/europe/turkey-erdogan-fethullah-gulen.html
Turkey Issues a Warrant for Fethullah Gulen, Cleric Accused in Coup - The New York Times
Erdogan  Recep Tayyip,Gulen  Fethullah,Turkey,Coups D'Etat and Attempted Coups D'Etat,Extradition
Aug. 4, 2016
4796
ISTANBUL — Turkey issued an arrest warrant on Thursday for Fethullah Gulen, a Muslim cleric based in the United States, who was accused last month of orchestrating a failed coup against the government of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan.The warrant issued by an Istanbul court said Mr. Gulen, who has lived in self-imposed exile in Pennsylvania since 1999, ordered the July 15 coup attempt that resulted in the deaths of more than 250 people, the state-run Anadolu news agency reported.The order for Mr. Gulen’s arrest is a step toward a formal extradition request to the United States, which Turkish officials say will be submitted after an investigation into the botched coup. Ankara has already sent evidence to the White House that alleges Mr. Gulen plotted the coup. Mr. Gulen has denied those charges.Mr. Erdogan has been calling for the extradition since 2013, when he accused Mr. Gulen’s followers, who held positions in the judiciary, of orchestrating a corruption inquiry that implicated Mr. Erdogan’s inner circle.An arrest warrant for Mr. Gulen was issued in Turkey in 2014, accusing him of directing “an armed terrorist organization” that illegally tapped the conversations of the prime minister and president.Since the coup attempt, the Turkish government has purged tens of thousands of people in the police, judiciary, military and education sectors whom it suspected of links to Mr. Gulen’s movement, which is regarded by Turkey as a terrorist organization. More than 25,000 people have been detained.Speaking in Ankara on Thursday, Mr. Erdogan said he vowed to “cut off this bloody organization’s business connections and revenue sources.”Late on Thursday, Mr. Gulen denounced the arrest warrant in a statement, saying that “the Turkish court system is without judicial independence, so this warrant is yet another example of President Erdogan’s drive for authoritarianism and away from democracy.”The warrant was issued as a multiparty delegation of Turkish lawmakers, visiting with The New York Times editorial board on Thursday, said relations with the United States would suffer if Mr. Gulen was not extradited.