http://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/03/weekinreview/word-for-word-kissinger-in-china-beijing-1971-oh-to-be-a-fly-on-the-great-wall.html
Word for Word -- Kissinger in China; Beijing, 1971: Oh, to Be A Fly on the Great Wall - The New York Times
CHINA,ZHOU ENLAI,NIXON  RICHARD MILHOUS,KISSINGER  HENRY A,UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS,CHINA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US
March 3, 2002
6302
RARELY has high-wire statecraft been practiced more deftly than in July 1971, when Henry A. Kissinger, then the national security adviser, traveled to China to meet with Prime Minister Zhou Enlai to set the stage for President Richard M. Nixon's historic visit in 1972.In the first volume of his memoirs, ''The White House Years'' (Little, Brown, 1979), Mr. Kissinger recalls Zhou as an ''urbane, infinitely patient, extraordinarily intelligent, subtle'' leader, and characterized their extensive talks as ''essentially giving shape to intangibles of mutual understanding'' between two nations isolated from each other for nearly 20 years.Those intangibles became much more tangible last week when the National Security Archive, an independent research group, made public 41 recently declassified documents relating to the preparations for the president's trip. In fact, the official White House transcripts of the meetings between Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Zhou often belie the contention in Mr. Kissinger's memoirs that little of practical substance was put on the table.Last week, Mr. Kissinger explained that he wrote his memoirs in 1977, when the records of the meetings were still classified. ''So it's possible I didn't give a full account of everything,'' he said. ''I try to lead an honorable life,'' he added.In any event, it seems clear the statesmen chewed over a lot more than Peking Duck. With Mr. Kissinger clearly setting the agenda, and with both men maneuvering for position, the transcripts provide a case study in global diplomacy as high art. Excerpts follow.   ELAINE SCIOLINOMr. Kissinger kicked off the talks by explaining the twin purposes of the meetings: to ''work out satisfactory understandings'' for Mr. Nixon's visit, and to ''lay the groundwork by discussing issues between us, our mutual concerns in Asia, and the peace of the world.'' Before that, however, he had a request:Mr. Kissinger: The president asked that this mission be secret until after we meet, so we can meet unencumbered by bureaucracy, free of the past, and with the greatest possible latitude.Prime Minister Zhou: You don't like bureaucracy either.Kissinger: Yes, and it's mutual; the bureaucracy doesn't like me.Issue No. 1 was Taiwan, considered by Beijing to be a renegade province. Although Mr. Kissinger wrote in his memoir that ''Zhou and I by tacit agreement did not press controversial issues to the hilt,'' and that ''Taiwan was mentioned only briefly,'' the transcripts seem to suggest otherwise. Last week, Mr. Kissinger said he regretted his later account of the discussion, but added: ''We were still recognizing the Taiwan government. We had to get some statements of principle within which we could get into other issues. That was the intention.''Zhou: History . . . proves that Taiwan has belonged to China for more than 1,000 years -- a longer period than Long Island has been a part of the U.S. . . . Therefore, in recognizing China the U.S. must . . . recognize the P.R.C. as the sole legitimate government of China and not make any exceptions. Just as we recognize the U.S. as the sole legitimate government without considering Hawaii, the last state, an exception to your sovereignty, or still less, Long Island. Taiwan is a Chinese province . . . and is an inalienable part of Chinese territory.This leads us to the second question: The U.S. must withdraw all its armed forces and dismantle all its military installations on Taiwan and in the Taiwan Straits within a limited period. This is the natural logic of the matter. . . .Kissinger: Our military presence in Taiwan at this moment is composed of two elements, the two-thirds of it which is related to activities in other parts of Asia, and the one-third of it which is related to the defense of Taiwan. We are prepared to remove that part related to activities other than to the defense of Taiwan . . . within a specified brief period of time after the ending of the war in Indochina. We are prepared to begin withdrawing our other forces on Taiwan as our relations improve, so that the military questions need not be a principal obstacle between us.I may say, incidentally, that these are personal decisions of President Nixon which have not yet been discussed with our bureaucracy or with Congress, and so should be treated with great confidence.As for the political future of Taiwan, we are not advocating a ''two Chinas'' solution or a ''one China, one Taiwan'' solution.As a student of history, one's prediction would have to be that the political evolution is likely to be in the direction which Prime Minister Zhou Enlai indicated to me. But if we want to put the relations between our two countries on a genuine basis of understanding, we must recognize each other's necessities.Zhou: What necessities?Kissinger: We should not be forced into formal declarations in a brief period of time which by themselves have no practical effect. However, we will not stand in the way of basic evolution, once you and we have come to a basic understanding. . . .Mr. Zhou raised the issue of American support for those seeking Taiwanese independence:Zhou: What is the attitude of your government toward the so-called Taiwanese Independence Movement?Kissinger: The Taiwanese? We would not support this.Zhou: Was it supported by a part of the people of the U.S. government, that is, by the C.I.A. or Pentagon?Kissinger: There is an exaggerated opinion in the minds of people in many parts of the world about the abilities of the C.I.A. . . .Zhou: I attach great importance to what you have just now said: the U.S. government and the president do not support, and will not support, the so-called Independence Movement of Taiwan.Kissinger: May I call you ''prime minister,'' or is it offensive?Zhou: As you like.Kissinger: The term is more natural in English. Mr. Prime Minister, bureaucracies are large, and sometimes not perfectly manageable.The talk soon turned to Vietnam and the Nixon administration's eagerness to bring the war to an end, hopefully with China's help:Kissinger: I would like to tell the prime minister, on behalf of President Nixon, as solemnly as I can, that first of all we are prepared to withdraw completely from Indochina and to give a fixed date, if there is a cease-fire and release of our prisoners. Secondly, we will permit the political solution of South Vietnam to evolve and to leave it to the Vietnamese alone. . . .We seek no military bases or military allies in Indochina, and we will pursue no policy in that area which could concern the People's Republic of China. We are willing to guarantee this. . . .Mr. Kissinger spoke frankly about the prospects for President Nguyen Van Thieu and the winds of political change in Saigon:Our position is not to maintain any particular government in South Vietnam. We are prepared to undertake specific obligations restricting the support we can give to the government after a peace settlement and defining the relationship we can maintain with it after a peace settlement.What we cannot do is to participate in the overthrow of people with whom we have been allied. . . .If the government is as unpopular as you seem to think, then the quicker our forces are withdrawn the quicker it will be overthrown. And if it is overthrown after we withdraw, we will not intervene.Among the other topics discussed was the perceived military expansion by Japan and the Soviet Union, China's admission to the United Nations, American troops in South Korea and tensions between India and Pakistan. At one point, Mr. Kissinger interrupted an exchange about the history of Western involvement in Indochina to make an observation about the change in America's attitudes toward Communism since the days of Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and the Eisenhower administration:In 1954, Secretary Dulles believed that it was America's mission to fight communism all around the world and for the U.S. to be the principal force, to engage itself in every struggle at every point of the world at any point in time.President Nixon operates on a different philosophy. We do not deal with communism in the abstract, but with specific communist states on the basis of their specific actions toward us, and not as an abstract crusade.We believe that if people want to defend themselves, they must do it on the basis of their own efforts and not on the basis of the efforts of a country 10,000 miles away.So when we offer to withdraw from Vietnam, it is not in order to devise some trick to re-enter in some other manner but rather that we want to base our foreign policy on the realities of the present and not on the dreams of the past.Last week was an eventful one for Nixonians. Tucked away in 500 hours of tapes released by the National Archives was a striking suggestion by President Nixon in 1972 for escalating the Vietnam War. After Mr. Kissinger presented a variety of options, Mr. Nixon said, ''I'd rather use the nuclear bomb.''''That, I think, would just be too much,'' Mr. Kissinger replied.''The nuclear bomb, does that bother you?'' Mr. Nixon asked. ''I just want you to think big.''The next month, Mr. Nixon ordered the largest escalation of the war since 1968.