https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/09/sports/basketball/new-york-knicks-david-griffin-phil-jackson.html
Knicks’ Search to Replace Phil Jackson Loses Some Steam - The New York Times
Basketball,New York Knicks,Brooklyn Nets,Cleveland Cavaliers,Griffin  David (1973- ),Hardaway  Tim Jr,Carroll  DeMarre (1986- )
July 9, 2017
9244
When the Knicks parted ways with Phil Jackson two weeks ago, David Griffin emerged as a natural candidate to replace him.Until recently, Griffin had been the general manager of the Cleveland Cavaliers, who won the 2016 N.B.A. title behind LeBron James. Even though the Cavaliers also made it to the N.B.A. finals in 2015 and 2017, Griffin and Dan Gilbert, the owner of the Cavaliers, could not come to an agreement on a new contract last month.So Griffin departed, immediately becoming a desirable option for any team looking for someone to run its basketball operations.Enter the Knicks. On Friday night, Griffin had dinner with the Knicks’ general manager, Steve Mills, who has been running the team’s front office in the wake of Jackson’s departure despite not having a traditional player-personnel background.The dinner seemed a strong hint that Griffin might join the Knicks. However, less than 48 hours later, Griffin had withdrawn his name from consideration by the team, according to a person in basketball with knowledge of the situation.ESPN was the first to report the news, citing a difference of opinion between Griffin and the Knicks over how much control he would have over basketball decisions.All of this happened while the Knicks were preparing to introduce Tim Hardaway Jr. on Monday as their first significant free-agent acquisition this summer. The Knicks, who drafted Hardaway only to have Jackson trade him years later, signed him to a four-year, $71 million contract, a huge amount for a young, still-developing player but a figure big enough to keep Hardaway’s previous team, the Atlanta Hawks, from matching it.With Hardaway, a 6-foot-6 wing player who can hit from 3-point range, on the roster, there is increasing speculation that the Knicks will find an amenable deal to send away Carmelo Anthony, who has a no-trade clause, and allow the team to fully rebuild with younger players.Jackson, who was dismissed with two years left on his contract, tweeted a photo on Saturday night of a person with his feet up while looking at a body of water. If there was a message, it may be that Jackson was relaxing in the wake of his departure.The Knicks still have to find someone to replace him, although it will not be Griffin. For now, Mills will be spearheading that effort, although he is getting assistance from Tim Leiweke, a veteran sports executive.The Knicks’ neighbors, the Nets, missed out on their own attempt to sign a restricted free agent when the Washington Wizards matched their four-year, $106 million offer to Otto Porter Jr., bringing back a vital part of last year’s 49-victory team.The Nets responded by agreeing to a trade for Toronto Raptors forward DeMarre Carroll and the $30 million left on his contract. The Nets, who will send Justin Hamilton to the Raptors, will also receive Toronto’s first- and second-round picks in 2018, according to multiple news media reports.