https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/10/us/kerry-favors-an-american-commitment-to-bringing-in-more-refugees.html
Kerry Favors an American Commitment to Bringing in More Refugees - The New York Times
Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,Kerry  John,United States Politics and Government,United States International Relations,Immigration and Emigration,Senate Committee on Appropriations,Syria,Refugees and Displaced Persons
Sept. 9, 2015
6538
WASHINGTON —  Secretary of State John Kerry told lawmakers in a closed-door session on Wednesday that he favored significantly increasing the number of refugees the United States is willing to accept, possibly to as many as 100,000 next year, according to congressional staff members and Obama administration officials.The United States set a limit on refugee visas of 70,000 in the 2015 fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30, and the administration has signaled to Congress that it is looking to increase the ceiling next year to 75,000. But the State Department has been re-examining the issue as the migrant crisis has roiled Europe and refugee organizations have appealed for the United States to shoulder more of the burden.In his public remarks on Wednesday, Mr. Kerry said the administration was prepared to accept more refugees, but he underscored that the final number had yet to be determined.“We are committed to increasing the number of refugees that we take, and we are looking hard at the number that we can specifically manage with respect to the crisis in Syria and Europe,” Mr. Kerry said after a meeting with Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois.The 100,000 figure that Mr. Kerry mentioned in his closed-door meeting with lawmakers from the Senate and House Appropriations Committees was described as notional and still under study. The administration would need to line up congressional support and funding for the increase.But the figure indicates that some in the administration are coming to the view that 75,000 is not sufficient. And some leading lawmakers have also called for stronger actions.“For months, I have urged the administration to dramatically increase the number of Syrian refugees it would accept in the face of this crisis,” Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, the top Democrat on the Senate Appropriations Committee, said after meeting with Mr. Kerry. “We must do more.”Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina and a presidential candidate, said on Tuesday: “We should take our fair share. We are good people. I don’t think the average American has any idea what it’s like to live in the Mideast right now.”Sentiment on the issue is mixed in Congress, however, and some lawmakers have said they are worried about absorbing Middle Eastern refugees into their communities. Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, is said to have raised that concern with Mr. Kerry.Even if the refugee total is increased to 100,000 for 2016, it would hardly resolve the Syrian migrant crisis. Not all of the 30,000 additional refugees would be Syrians. A senior State Department official who briefed reporters on Wednesday on the condition of anonymity said that if the limit was increased, the United States would admit more Africans as well as Syrians.The United States has accepted 1,500 refugees from Syria since the start of the war there. American procedures for vetting Syrian migrants are slow; the State Department official said the vetting process took 18 to 24 months.The ultimate solution, administration officials have long stressed, is to find a political solution in Syria. And the more than $4 billion that the United States has provided in humanitarian assistance for Syrian refugees is more than that given by any other nation.But with no diplomatic solution to the conflict on the horizon, refugee experts have urged the Obama administration to resettle more Syrians to ease their suffering. David Miliband, the former British foreign secretary, who heads the International Rescue Committee, has called on the United States to resettle 65,000 Syrians before the end of 2016.While the Obama administration weighs how many refugees to take, some allies have announced bold steps. Prime Minister Tony Abbott of Australia said Wednesday that his country would take in an additional 12,000 refugees from Iraq and Syria, and would join in an air campaign in Syria against the Islamic State.Australia will focus on taking in women, children and families who are members of persecuted minorities and who have sought refuge in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, Mr. Abbott said. It will also pay to support 240,000 people who have fled Iraq and Syria and are now living in neighboring countries, at an expected cost of $44 million Australian dollars, or $31 million.On Sunday, Mr. Abbott said that Australia would help ease the migration crisis, without pledging to take in any more refugees, prompting criticism.Australia currently resettles about 13,750 people annually under humanitarian visas, a number scheduled to increase to 18,750 by 2018-19. The 12,000 places will be in addition to that quota, Mr. Abbott’s office said.As a percentage of its population, Australia is the leading nation for resettlement of refugees under the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Abbott’s office said.