https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/sports/tennis/french-open-womens-final-jelena-ostapenko.html
A Latvian ‘Not Afraid of Anything’ Makes the French Open Women’s Final - The New York Times
French Open (Tennis),Tennis,Bacsinszky  Timea,Ostapenko  Jelena
June 8, 2017
4836
PARIS — Like her forehand, major success has come remarkably fast for Jelena Ostapenko at this French Open.On Thursday, her 20th birthday, Ostapenko reached her first Grand Slam singles final with a 7-6 (4), 3-6, 6-3 victory over 30th-seeded Timea Bacsinszky.Ostapenko is the first Latvian to reach a Grand Slam singles final and the youngest player to reach one since Caroline Wozniacki made the 2009 United States Open final at 19. Ostapenko also became the first unseeded player to reach the final here in singles since 1983.It seems an appropriately swift rise for Ostapenko. Anabel Medina, her coach since April, called Ostapenko “hyperactive.”“Her life is like this: everything very fast,” said Medina, a recently retired WTA player. “Hit fast, walk fast, talk fast. Her personality is like this. She’s very active. She has a lot of energy all the time.“And she’s putting this activity on the court — she’s the same. She’s thinking of what she’s going to do and then she goes for it.”Ostapenko will face third-seeded Simona Halep in the final. Halep, who reached her first final at Roland Garros in 2014, beat second-seeded Karolina Pliskova, 6-4, 3-6, 6-3.Halep, 25, was the  favorite in a field that lacked the recent champions Serena Williams and Maria Sharapova, and was predicted by many to make a deep run here. Ostapenko, ranked No. 47, was not. But with her staggering high-risk, high-reward play, Ostapenko has found herself in a final despite this being just her eighth time playing in the main draw of a Grand Slam tournament.Neither Ostapenko nor Bacsinszky could dominate on serve — each player held seven times but was broken eight times — with a stiff wind affecting the match. Whichever player was on the north end of Court Philippe Chatrier, with the wind to her back, won 22 of the 30 games.But with or against the wind, Ostapenko gained the upper hand with her superior power and fearless shot selection. Undaunted by the occasion, or by several costly misses that allowed Bacsinszky to take control of the second set, Ostapenko never relented.“I was telling myself that I have to still play aggressive, but to be smarter and to not make many unforced errors,” Ostapenko said. “I think it helped me that I was still playing very aggressive.”Ostapenko set up match point with a forehand return winner, and cracked a forehand cross-court for her 50th and final winner, sealing a victory and a berth in the final. She turned and screamed toward her player’s box, where Medina looked on.Bacsinszky, who also celebrated her birthday Thursday, is eight years older, and attributed much of Ostapenko’s bold play to her youth.”She’s 20 — not afraid of anything,” said Bacsinszky, 28. “She doesn’t measure maybe what she’s doing right now. She probably doesn’t care. She’s just hitting it the same.“Best example is the match point: I mean, I serve very well wide; she’s, like, hitting as hard as she can down the line from nowhere.” Bacsinszky held her thumb and index finger less than an inch apart to show how close Ostapenko’s shot was to the net.“I mean, who tries that, seriously?” Bacsinszky marveled. “I mean, it’s like 1 out of 10. But she does it. So, we’ll see if she does it at 28 years old.”Ostapenko has defied many odds already: She had never reached the fourth round of a Grand Slam event before this tournament, and has never won a title on the WTA Tour. The last player to win their first tour-level title at Roland Garros was Gustavo Kuerten, who did it on June 8, 1997. That day, Jelena Ostapenko was born.Halep said she hoped her match against Pliskova, another aggressive player with powerful ground strokes, would serve as effective preparation for facing Ostapenko, whom she has never faced.”So maybe it’s going to be the same plan,” said Halep, who is seeking her first Grand Slam title. “You never know with this kind of player, so I have just to stay there for every ball. Every ball is important against them. So I will be there, and ready to fight.”Medina said she believed Ostapenko should feel free to swing away in the final as well.“She has nothing to lose; she’s going to play with a top-10 player, and she’s 47th in the world,” Medina said. “All the pressure is going to be on the other side, so she has to just enjoy. Of course, be focused and prepare to try to win, and then we’ll see what happens on Saturday.”Halep also tried to minimize pressure on herself.“Of course she has nothing to lose; it’s a big thing for her what is happening,” Halep said of Ostapenko. “But I can feel that I’m in the same position. I feel that I have many years ahead, so it’s just a new opportunity to do it if it will happen.“I played once before here, and I was very close to win it,” she added, referring to her three-set loss to Sharapova in the 2014 final. “If it’s going to happen this time, it’s going to be great. If not, I will have many years ahead to work and to replay some finals. We’ll see.”Pliskova, for her part, expressed little confidence in Ostapenko’s chances to beat the player she could not.“No doubt that Ostapenko, she’s having a good run here, and she’s dangerous player for everybody, I think,” said Pliskova. “But I would bet everything, what I have, on Simona.”