http://www.nytimes.com/2000/11/05/books/big-brother.html
Big Brother - The New York Times
LEE KUAN YEW,REVIEWS,BOOKS AND LITERATURE,FROM THIRD WORLD TO FIRST: THE SINGAPORE STORY: 1965-2000 (BOOK)
Nov. 5, 2000
9546
FROM THIRD WORLD TO FIRSTThe Singapore Story: 1965-2000.By Lee Kuan Yew.Illustrated. 729 pp. New York:HarperCollins Publishers. $35.Lee Kuan Yew has been one of the most intriguing and exasperating leaders of the post-World War II era. It is not just that he was among the most brilliant and frank, or that he shaped an entire country to his own fancy. Nor is it simply that the nation he forged, Singapore, started off as a poor colony of Britain and ended up substantially wealthier per capita, becoming a model variously studied by Chinese Communists and Western capitalists. No, what is most tantalizing is that Lee, who ruled Singapore from 1959 until he retired, sort of, in 1990, is a Western-educated philosopher-king with a reputation for challenging the accepted wisdom of the West. Pro-Western democrats are a dime a dozen, but Lee Kuan Yew is the most eloquent autocrat in the world today.Perhaps that is not entirely fair, for Lee's party managed to win overwhelming electoral victories in Singapore. But Lee won his margin of victory in part by stifling critics, either impoverishing them through court judgments or imprisoning them without trial. Lee has a first-rate mind, speaks in the proper English he polished at Cambridge University and defends repressive policies with a thoughtfulness and vigor that make Western democrats squirm. ''After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Americans have become as dogmatic and evangelical as the Communists were,'' Lee complains in his new book, in a typical salvo. ''They want to promote democracy and human rights everywhere, except where it would hurt themselves as in the oil-rich Arabian peninsula.''The second volume of Lee's memoirs, ''From Third World to First'' begins roughly from Singapore's independence in 1965. Lee was already Singapore's leader, but he faced enormous challenges at the outset, and foreign correspondents were gloomy about whether the tiny island state could survive. At the opening of Singapore's first Parliament in December 1965, he had to accept an escort from Malaysian troops, who regarded themselves as the real rulers. Lee fumed but did not dare refuse, and a theme throughout the book is his efforts to assert Singapore's identity as a mostly Chinese speck in a sea of Malaysians and Indonesians.Another crucial challenge was the economy, which was dependent on British military bases that would soon be closed. Lee's basic strategy was to plead with foreign companies to establish sweatshops in Singapore. At a time when many developing countries vilified economic imperialists, Singapore recruited any imperialist with a buck. In the process, Lee -- who had started his career as a lawyer for the labor unions -- emasculated the unions, for fear that they would discourage investment. Lee recalls as a ''turning point in Singapore's industrial history'' the moment when a powerful union federation challenged him in 1967. Lee cracked down: the authorities arrested 15 union leaders, deregistered the unions and announced that the striking workers had fired themselves. In effect, Lee broke the independent labor movement and won a long labor peace that was a component of Singapore's long boom.Other leaders have reshaped nations -- Kemal Ataturk in Turkey, Lenin in Russia, Deng Xiaoping in China -- but no one left a deeper imprint on his people than Lee. He even changed the languages people spoke. Schools switched to teach mainly in English, and Lee badgered the majority Chinese population to give up their native languages (like Cantonese or Hokkien) even in their homes and to speak Mandarin instead.Lee was involved not just in every government decision but fostered a ''nanny state'' that urged college graduates to have more children, banned bubblegum, punished people who did not flush toilets and, in earlier years, forcibly gave haircuts to young men with long hair. He created the least corrupt state in Asia, one whose public schools rank as perhaps the best in the world and whose pension system is regarded by many scholars as a model.There was, however, another side to Lee that many in the West find harder to stomach. He is unapologetic, for example, about the repressive measures he took against Communist sympathizers, who initially had seemed a threat to the government. ''Could we have defeated them if we had allowed them habeas corpus and abjured the powers of detention without trial?'' Lee asks. ''I doubt it.'' Lee justifies locking up Chia Thye Poh, a mild-mannered leftist, for 20 years: ''He continued to deny his Communist links, playing on the human rights sentiments of the Western media. His detention, in spite of Western media pressure, served to discourage other Communist cadres from reactivating their cause under cover of exercising their democratic rights. They were formidable opponents. We had to be as resolute and unyielding in this contest of wills.''Really? To many of us who visited and admired Singapore, it was a puzzle how it could simultaneously be so modern economically and so medieval politically. Most of us felt that Lee Kuan Yew's reputation would be higher in the world today if he had tolerated more pesky criticism, received slightly smaller majorities in elections and not tried so ruthlessly to smash opponents with all the sledgehammers that the state possessed.Lee's greatest achievement was nurturing an educated middle class with a stake in the system, a distinct identity as Singaporeans, and enough wisdom to distrust Communists or demagogues. In this memoir, he recounts how he did this -- creating incentives for private home ownership, for example -- but the upshot was that he fostered an electorate that always seemed to have much more common sense than he gave it credit for. Lee himself seemed to come around to this view over time. As he and Singapore mellowed and became steadily more tolerant, open and democratic, Lee increasingly realized that he could trust Singaporeans to make decisions on their own, and he is one of the few Confucian emperors ever to step down voluntarily.Lee mentions, in passing, some of his battles with the Western press over his authoritarian policies. (The best known incident involved the caning of an American teenager found guilty of vandalism.) It would have been more interesting for an American audience if he had argued his case more aggressively and confronted the counterarguments more directly. One can disagree with him, but intolerance and authoritarianism have never had so articulate or stimulating a spokesman. These are rich memoirs, the legacy of an extraordinary man, and in many ways, this book is like Lee himself: smart, thoughtful, blunt and provocative.