https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/05/world/asia/rodrigo-duterte-philippines-barack-obama.html
Rodrigo Duterte, Philippines’ Leader, Says Obama ‘Can Go to Hell’ - The New York Times
Duterte  Rodrigo,Philippines,United States International Relations,Obama  Barack,Arms Trade
Oct. 4, 2016
8197
MANILA — President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines complained on Tuesday that Washington was refusing to sell weapons to his government and said that President Obama “can go to hell.”Mr. Duterte, who has been angered by Washington’s criticism of his deadly campaign against drug users, threatened to turn to China and Russia for weapons purchases.“Instead of helping us, the first to hit was the State Department,” Mr. Duterte said in a speech to local officials. “So you can go to hell, Mr. Obama, you can go to hell.”Mr. Duterte, who took office on June 30, began a war on drugs that has claimed about 3,000 lives, the Philippine authorities say. Many of those killed were people suspected of dealing drugs who were gunned down by unknown assailants and left in the streets. The police say they have killed more than 1,200 drug sellers and users who resisted arrest.The United States, the European Union and the United Nations have expressed concern over the extrajudicial killings and have urged the Philippines to live up to its human rights obligations. Human Rights Watch and other rights groups have also urged the Philippines to stop its violent campaign.Mr. Duterte, who resents being criticized and often uses vulgar language to make his points, has repeatedly lashed out. Last month, he called Mr. Obama by a slur in Tagalog that can be translated as “son of a bitch.” The insult led Mr. Obama to cancel a one-on-one meeting with Mr. Duterte during a gathering of Asian leaders in Laos. Mr. Duterte later apologized.And last week, in trying to rebut criticism that he was like Hitler, Mr. Duterte said he would be “happy to slaughter” millions of Filipino drug users just as Hitler killed millions of Jews during the Holocaust. He has since apologized several times to Jewish people around the world.During public appearances on Tuesday, Mr. Duterte said the United States was unwilling to sell his government missiles and other weapons. It was unclear what had prompted his statement. A spokeswoman for the United States Embassy in Manila said she had no comment.Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said that Mr. Duterte’s increasingly inflammatory comments directed at Mr. Obama, as well as his warnings of reduced ties, were “at odds with the warm relationship that exists between the Filipino and American people.”Mr. Earnest said the alliance between the two nations remained strong, noting that annual joint military exercises with the Philippines began Tuesday. But he said that the United States was “deeply concerned by reports of widespread extrajudicial killings by or at the behest of government authorities,” and that American officials would continue to raise concerns about those reports with Filipino officials.On Tuesday, Mr. Duterte said that it was his “sacred duty to keep the integrity of this republic” and that America’s rivals would be happy to sell him weapons.“If you don’t want to sell arms, I’ll go to Russia,” he said. “I sent the generals to Russia, and Russia said: ‘Do not worry, we have everything you need. We’ll give it to you.’ On China, they said, ‘Just come over and sign, and everything will be delivered.’”After his speech, Mr. Duterte visited a synagogue to repeat his apology for his Hitler remarks. While speaking there, he suggested he might eventually “break up” with the United States, which has been the Philippines’ strongest international partner since World War II.