https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/09/arts/secrets-of-the-emoji-world-now-with-its-own-convention-emojicon.html
Secrets of the Emoji World, Now With Its Own Convention - The New York Times
Emojis and Emoticons,Conventions  Fairs and Trade Shows,Lee  Jennifer 8,Emojicon,Festivals,Unicode Consortium
Nov. 7, 2016
1051
SAN FRANCISCO — The party felt like a text-message bubble brought to life.On Friday night, more than 400 people gathered here in a sleek co-working space near the headquarters of Uber, Pinterest and Airbnb to kick off the first Emojicon, a three-day “celebration of all things emoji.” Yellow cry-laugh emoji beach balls bounced around, and princess emoji balloons floated above. Guests posed in a photo booth stocked with cardboard props of grimacing emoji and meat-on-a-stick emoji, plopped down on devil and poop emoji beanbags and snacked exclusively on foods sourced from the emoji keyboard — sushi, flan, beer, pears and skewers of dango, a sweet Japanese dumpling. A woman dressed like a giant peach emoji gave interviews lamenting Apple’s recent hyper-realistic redesign (it made the peach, claimed by many users as a sexually evocative symbol, look less like a butt), while a couple dressed as the dancing-twins emoji in matching leotards and bunny ears posed for photos near the bar. Overheard in the line for personalized emoji balloon animals: “This is the most San Francisco thing ever.”Jennifer 8. Lee, the founder of Emojicon, worked the crowd in a red baseball cap that said “internet!” Near the end of the evening, she paused to take stock of her creation. “I know how to throw a party,” she said.But emoji are more significant than they seem, and with Emojicon, Ms. Lee was out to create more than just a good time. We live out much of our lives inside those text-message bubbles now, and emoji are the tools we use to flirt, fight, relate and otherwise express ourselves. What many emoji users don’t know is that every speechless monkey and manicure emoji that shows up on our keyboards is tightly controlled by the Unicode Consortium, an opaque group of representatives from mammoth tech companies who decide which new glyphs will make their way to our fingertips and which will be kept out of reach. (Recently a proposal to add a new “selfie” emoji was approved, while a request for a rifle one was shot down.) Simmering beneath Emojicon’s smiley atmosphere is a sly ulterior motive — a bid to pry open the emoji creation process and make it more accessible to the people who actually use them.Ms. Lee, a former journalist for The New York Times and founder of the digital literary start-up Plympton, got a crash course in the politics of emoji after texting with a friend, the designer Yiying Lu, about getting together to eat dumplings. They realized there was no emoji to represent one of their favorite foods, so Ms. Lu drew up a design and Ms. Lee set out to have a dumpling added to the emoji keyboard alongside the hamburger and the pizza slice.That brought her to Unicode, a nonprofit organization that standardizes text characters across digital devices — ensuring that a message sent from, say, an American iPhone can be read on phones, computers and tablets used around the world. Thanks to the global surge in popularity of colorful and figurative emoji characters during the past several years, it also now decides whether we should all be able to text in-line pictures of brontosaurs, chopsticks and mermen to one another.Any texter who wants to propose a new emoji for review must first navigate Unicode’s labyrinthine website, submit an academic-style paper arguing the case and ultimately gain the approval of representatives from a pool of tech companies — including Apple, Google, Adobe, Oracle and the German software company SAP — that pay $18,000 each in annual dues for the right to vote on characters. Once approved, the encoded characters are kicked back to the tech companies to design the emoji in their own aesthetics and offer the glyph to their users. The whole process takes about 18 months.“I realized that the people making decisions around emoji tend to be engineers in their 50s and 60s who are very good at encoding things,” Ms. Lee said. “But they’re not necessarily qualified to make decisions on a dynamic, visual, global language.”Also, emoji stakeholders tend to fit one particular demographic mold. (Guess.) When the co-chairmen of Unicode’s emoji subcommittee, Mark E. Davis of Google and Peter Edberg of Apple, get together, they look a little like actors auditioning for the same role — white beards, wire-frame glasses, tucked-in polo shirts. So when Ms. Lee submitted her dumpling proposal in January, she also created Emojination, an organization dedicated to democratizing the emoji creation process. (Ms. Lee also talked her way into a spot on the emoji subcommittee, though she has no official Unicode vote.)And when she opened the doors to Emojicon over the weekend, she invited emoji academics, artists, designers and regular users to share a stage with emoji overlords like Mr. Davis. All told, about a thousand people participated during the three-day conference, with guests flying in from as far as Finland, India and Australia.Most festivities were held, appropriately, inside a San Francisco shopping mall, a site that teased at the psychic convergence of Silicon Valley power and consumer culture. The scene was a mix of high and low. Inside the main hall, a young man with the pseudonym Jamie Jandler hawked a vibrator shaped like an eggplant emoji that he calls Emojibator, while next door Rachel Been, an emoji designer at Google, described her careful efforts to design a suite of professional female emoji — including farmers, scientists and doctors — that would translate to women and girls around the world.Jeanne Brooks, who worked with Ms. Lee to create and run the conference, called Emojicon an attempt to “build a bridge” between Unicode and its users, and to engender a discussion about “who is represented and who isn’t.”Mr. Davis, who opened the conference with a talk aimed at demystifying the emoji selection process, seemed game. He winkingly referred to Unicode’s committees as “shadowy,” and represented them in a PowerPoint with the an emoji of faceless figures but then fielded questions from the crowd. When one conferencegoer inquired about his chances of getting his own emoji onto the keyboard, Mr. Davis said that Unicode had committed to ushering in about 70 emoji symbols a year and that about half of all public proposals made the cut. The dumpling is scheduled to show up on devices next year.Later, academics took to the stage to critique Unicode’s ultimate control over emoji; an Adobe typeface designer and font developer campaigned for more androgynous ones to complement the proliferation of female and male glyphs; and regular users advocated on behalf of their own emoji. Pitches included a person meditating, a peacock, a pretzel and a hijab. “I really just wanted a hijab emoji of me that I could use with my friends across social media,” said Rayouf Alhumedhi, a 15-year-old Saudi girl who came to Emojicon to push for a glyph that looks like her. “If there are four emoji of a mailbox, why isn’t there one for the 50 million hijabi women around the world?”And in perhaps the bluntest speech of the conference, Keith Winstein, a professor of computer science at Stanford, proposed wresting the creation of emoji from Unicode’s grasp entirely. He called Unicode’s control over modern visual expression “dangerous” and “crazy.” He praised communication platforms like Slack that allow users to upload their own emoji, no Unicode encoding required. To make the point, he called up Slack on a big screen behind him and conjured an emoji showing a woman wearing the hijab. “I didn’t need anyone’s permission,” he said. “I just did it!”Mr. Winstein and Ms. Lee recently collaborated on an official proposal asking Unicode to create a visual encoding loophole of sorts that would let people introduce pictographs without waiting for Unicode’s approval. He called it “the last frontier of emoji coding.” Unicode has yet to put it to a vote.