https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/arts/andy-serkis-apes-cgi.html
Caesar, Vader, Benjamin Button, the Red Queen: 10 Performances That Transcended Effects - The New York Times
Movies,Serkis  Andy,Williams  Robin,Pitt  Brad,Murphy  Eddie,Bonham Carter  Helena,Actors and Actresses
July 14, 2017
3446
Andy Serkis is one of the most accomplished actors of our time. His movies are often hits: According to Box Office Mojo, he outranks A-list names like Don Cheadle, Ben Stiller and Brad Pitt. But Mr. Serkis isn’t a familiar face — his success comes from disappearing into roles like Caesar in his new blockbuster, “War for the Planet of the Apes.”Mr. Serkis is among several actors we’ve singled out for delivering great performances that transcend the special effects or extreme makeup that define their characters. Many of Mr. Serkis’s major roles, like Gollum in “The Lord of the Rings,” involve performance capture, in which an actor’s movements and facial expressions are recorded and then digitally rendered in postproduction with a totally different look.Here are 10 other memorable performances where actors made us forget the alterations, while also rendering themselves unrecognizable.Williams, at his sappy best, played Andrew Martin, a household android in “Bicentennial Man” trying to find his way in the world as he develops the use of emotion and increasingly desires freedom. As The New York Times put it at the time, Williams “wants to tickle our funny bones while going for the emotional jugular with drippy, sugarcoated New Age sentiments.”And while the movie has the brilliant physical gags that Williams became synonymous with — Hey, look, it’s an android falling out a window! — it’s the more vulnerable moments that elevate his performance, especially as Andrew deals with the aging and death of those he cares about while going on to live himself.In another movie dealing with mortality, Mr. Pitt turned in a masterly performance in “The Curious Case of Benjamin Button” — a David Fincher film about de-aging. Mr. Pitt was nominated for an Oscar for this role, in which he deftly navigates playing an old man who knows very little about the world and grows younger until he is a dying baby who has seen it all.And in a testament to the computer generation skills behind the movie, the film won three Oscars: best achievement in art direction, makeup, and visual effects.A Mount Rushmore for horror movie performances would surely include Karloff’s portrayal of Frankenstein’s monster in the 1931 adaptation of the Mary Shelley novel. Karloff’s role, mostly delivered in grunts, was terrifying, imposing and showed a cold detachment that has made the movie a part of pop culture lore.The makeup, which showed grisly bolts sticking out of the monster’s neck, added to the ghoulishness that accompanied Karloff’s performance. There are glimpses of a monster that tries (and fails) to grasp the world, captured by an actor whose name appears in the opening credits as “?” Karloff’s role was a small part of a large body of work — but it is the monster for which he is most known.Ms. Saldana didn’t just have to master performance capture for her portrayal of the warrior Neytiri in “Avatar.” She also had to learn a made-up language: Na’vi.“Avatar” is a dizzying visual journey, but to supplement the film’s resplendent effects, Ms. Saldana said she had a skill that enhanced her performance. “I think I would have never booked ‘Avatar’ if it weren’t for my ballet background,” Ms. Saldana told The New York Times in May. “The actress James Cameron wanted was physically able. I thank god for something like ballet, which gave that space for me to be by myself and find peace. Ballet was my meditation, my therapy, my escape, my answer.”The New York Times review called the movie “shrill,” “overstuffed,” “spiritless,” — you get the point.But this list isn’t about movies. It’s about performances. And Mr. Carrey’s portrayal of the Grinch, a beloved character penned by Dr. Suess, was the lone bright spot in an otherwise dreary movie.While most roles requiring heavy makeup or computer generated effects feature the performer disappearing into the character, Mr. Carrey amplifies the tendencies he is best known for: loud, obnoxious, over-the-top and exaggerated. It is quintessential Jim Carrey and he somewhat rescues a movie that might otherwise be viewed as a pointless retread.Mr. Serkis’s riveting turn as Gollum was spread out over three “Lord of the Rings” films and in one of the “Hobbit” prequels. The role, like much of the visual effects work by the director Peter Jackson, was groundbreaking. Mr. Serkis, without ever showing his face, nimbly displayed the manic and depressive mannerisms of the creature and combined them with a grating, scratchy voice to portray emotions ranging from extreme despair to intoxicating joy.A. O. Scott wrote in the Times that this role, along with Mr. Serkis’s part in “King Kong” showed that he was “redefining screen acting for the digital age.”Here is the full list of characters that Mr. Murphy played: Sherman Klump, Buddy Love, Lance Perkins, Papa Klump, Mama Klump, Grandma Klump and Ernie Klump.That’s a lot of Klumps. That’s a lot of physical comedy. And it’s a lot of Eddie Murphy at his best. It was billed as a comeback and the makeup work was deemed “mind-boggling” in the Times review. And more:“Mr. Murphy proves himself a surprisingly strong actor here, playing Sherman with sweetness and poignancy, not to mention loads of funny weight-related humor,” Janet Maslin wrote at the time.Hurt, who died in January, was almost wholly unrecognizable in his 1980 turn as “Elephant Man,” for which he was Oscar-nominated. His performance was hailed as “extraordinary,” and the director of the film, David Lynch, called Hurt “the greatest actor in the world” a decade after its release.The role of Darth Vader has permeated pop culture. It was famously a dual performance (Mr. Prowse played the physical role, and Mr. Jones rerecorded Mr. Prowse’s lines to provide the voice) in the original trio of “Star Wars” movies.Mr. Jones’s voice — deep, monotone and raspy — gets most of the attention for the role. But the threatening lines that are so quotable now — “I find your lack of faith disturbing!” — are made possible by the sheer imposing presence of Mr. Prowse, a tall former bodybuilder, and an all-black costume, punctuated by the threatening mask.Tim Burton’s adaptation of “Alice in Wonderland” received critically mixed reviews. It received only a 52 percent on Rotten Tomatoes.  In her review, Manohla Dargis wrote that it was a “long fall turned long haul, despite the Burtonian flourishes.” But there was undeniable acclaim for the visual effects of the movie, which won two Oscars for best achievement in costume design and art direction.Ms. Bonham Carter was the Red Queen, and she inserted casual cruelty with a hint of the charm that she brought to the “Harry Potter” series with delightful skill. It was the kind of quirky part that was perfect for Ms. Bonham Carter — requiring a total buy-in, which she did with witty gusto.