https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/13/movies/the-tribeca-film-festival-at-15-a-packed-lineup.html
How to Make Sense of the Tribeca Film Festival - The New York Times
Tribeca Film Festival (NYC),Movies,Documentary Films and Programs
April 12, 2016
9522
Like many other 15-year-olds in New York, the Tribeca Film Festival is an unruly, hyperactive creature with an overstuffed schedule. Five main categories including Spotlight (nearly 40 films), Viewpoints (25) and the documentary competition (12), a genre-film mini-fest, filmmaker talks, interactive storytelling experiences, a virtual reality bazaar, a new television section, a street fair — how can you possibly choose what to see?One way is to focus. (Maybe you’ve said that to a teenager at some point.) To preview the festival’s 15th edition, which runs Wednesday through April 24, I’ve homed in on the signature categories, the narrative competitions. Even there the choices are plentiful: With the fiction competitors split into American and foreign divisions this year for the first time, 18 movies will be vying for the two prizes, from juries whose members include the actors Jennifer Westfeldt and Danny Glover and the director Sam Taylor-Johnson.Adding the United States competition (the festival previously had just a world narrative competition) may be an admirable gesture in support of American independent cinema, but this year, at least, it results in an unfavorable comparison: The foreign movies are generally better. On average, they’re more interesting, more stylish and more entertaining than their domestic counterparts.The American movies tend to come from an unhappier, heavier place. You wouldn’t want to speculate about the national mood based on 10 films, but the dramas are shadowed by violence, hopelessness and obsession, and even the comedies fashion ambiguous resolutions against backgrounds of grief, jealousy and fear.Deb Shoval’s “AWOL” showcases tender-tough performances by Lola Kirke and Breeda Wool in a story of star-crossed female lovers whose obstacles have less to do with societal norms than with the economic realities of Pennsylvania coal country. Joey (Ms. Kirke) sees the military as her only way out, while Rayna (Ms. Wool) can’t afford not to stay married to her children’s father.Another drama with echoes of foreign wars, Ian Olds’s messy, diverting “The Fixer,” is about an Afghan journalist (Dominic Rains) who escapes to Northern California and takes a job covering the police blotter for a small-town newspaper. His ideas of honor and justice don’t sit well with the sinister countercultural throwbacks who inhabit the local hills, one of whom is played by a longhaired James Franco.The most pleasure among the American selections comes from the comedies, including the actor and illustrator Demetri Martin’s directing debut, “Dean.” A grief-stricken father and son (Kevin Kline and Mr. Martin) aggravate each other to the point that the son flees across the country to California, where he meets a potential soul mate (Gillian Jacobs). Mr. Martin, who also wrote the script, delivers a winning combination of winsomeness and rue, helped considerably by his own drawings, which frequently fill the screen and take on animated life.My favorite of the American films, Ingrid Jungermann’s “Women Who Kill,” is a comedy so low-key and diffident, not to mention morbid, that it can take several beats to catch on to the jokes. Ms. Jungermann, a director, writer and star of the popular web series “The Slope,” once again trains her satirical eye on the lesbians of Park Slope, Brooklyn, this time playing a journalist who specializes in female serial killers. (Every woman she meets is a fan of her podcast, “Women Who Kill.”) Not all the performances are as sharp as Ms. Jungermann’s writing, but her dissection of a certain strain of L.G.B.T. attitudinizing and shallowness is scathing, loving and consistently funny.The eight foreign stories are as dark and problematic as the American films but generally feel tougher, more outward looking, more clever and, crucially, more energetic. “Mother,” by the Estonian director Kadri Kousaar, is a pitch-black comedy-mystery about a wife and mother whose son lies comatose in an upstairs bedroom, the victim of an unsolved shooting. We eventually learn who the gunman was — and gain a fairly precise picture of a small town’s frightening moral and sexual landscape — through the monologues of the son’s visitors, who rashly give up their secrets in his silent, unblinking presence.Daniel Burman of Argentina gives a touch of magic realism, without dipping into the supernatural, to “The Tenth Man,” a teasing parable about fathers and sons and the power of faith (which can sometimes take many years to reveal itself). Alan Sabbagh gives a spiky performance as Ariel, a businessman who left Argentina for New York but returns to visit his father, a revered figure among the poor residents of Buenos Aires’s Jewish quarter. As Ariel tries to track him down during the week leading up to Purim, Dad is as mysteriously absent as he was during his son’s childhood, tending to the needs of the community. Mr. Burman’s episodic story peels away the layers of resentment and obligation, arriving at a tentative and touching moment of understanding.A highlight of the international competition, and of the festival as a whole, is Udi Aloni’s “Junction 48,” winner of an audience award at the Berlin Film Festival. Following a group of Palestinian friends with a passion for hip-hop, it portrays the personal and societal toll of the Israeli-Arab conflict while constantly moving to the beats and melodies of the music the characters make — smart, throbbing raps about life under occupation, traditional folk songs, Palestinian pop and the effortlessly rhythmic banter of the young musicians. Mr. Aloni fuses joy and sorrow throughout the film, and ends with a devastating image encapsulating the intransigent forces that conspire to silence young artists.Any look at the Tribeca lineup leaves out a bounty of potentially interesting and in some cases high-profile fare, so I’ll throw out a few more titles that might grab your attention. Mike Birbiglia’s “Don’t Think Twice,” like “Junction 48,” depicts a group of dedicated young performers, in this case a New York improv troupe whose existence is threatened when one of its members joins a television show with “Live” in its title. It’s like watching a breakup rom-com that’s about a group rather than a couple, and its excellent cast includes Keegan-Michael Key, Gillian Jacobs and Chris Gethard.Fans of the ferociously talented Viola Davis will want to seek out James Lapine’s “Custody,” in which she plays a family court judge who has marital problems of her own. Chris Prynoski’s animated “Nerdland” is a garish, scatological Hollywood satire with Paul Rudd and Patton Oswalt giving voice to a pair of hangers-on desperate for fame; the voice cast includes Mike Judge, whose “Beavis and Butt-Head” is one of Mr. Prynoski’s inspirations.The TV section, called Tribeca Tune In, includes premieres of the new AMC drama “The Night Manager,” an adaptation of the John le Carré novel directed by Susanne Bier, and a marathon screening of the ESPN documentary mini-series “O.J.: Made in America.” The documentary competition officially opens with “Contemporary Color,” Bill and Turner Ross’s film of the color-guard event staged last year at Barclays Center in Brooklyn by David Byrne. And finally — because what better deserves the final word? — there’s “Obit,” Vanessa Gould’s documentary about my colleagues who spend their days and nights writing obituaries for The New York Times.