https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/04/opinion/crisis-in-egypt.html
Crisis in Egypt - The New York Times
Egypt,Morsi  Mohamed,Defense and Military Forces,Coups D'Etat and Attempted Coups D'Etat,Demonstrations  Protests  and Riots,Middle East and North Africa Unrest (2010- ),Muslim Brotherhood (Egypt),Editorials,Obama  Barack
July 3, 2013
2865
Despite his failings, and there were plenty, President Mohamed Morsi was Egypt’s first democratically elected leader, and his overthrow by the military on Wednesday was unquestionably a coup. It would be tragic if Egyptians allowed the 2011 revolution that overthrew the dictator Hosni Mubarak to end with this rejection of democracy.As Egyptians consider their future, one thing should be paramount: avoiding violence that could plunge the country into a civil war that could make Mr. Morsi’s troubled term and overthrow look mild by comparison. In part, that would require making it clear that Mr. Morsi, the Muslim Brotherhood and Islamists in general will still have a place in any emerging new political order. Otherwise, any claims of Egyptian democracy are rendered moot. One only has to look to Iraq for how excluding major interest groups ensures continued strife.There is somewhat of a contradiction in the embrace by Egypt’s opposition forces of the military, which has wielded too much power since 1952. The military was the force behind Mr. Mubarak, then became the protesters’ protector when Mr. Mubarak was overthrown. Subsequently, the generals became the interim government, only to incur the peoples’ wrath when they proved inept at governing yet clung to power even after Mr. Morsi was elected. He eventually got the military to retreat from politics. Just how the generals will play the power game this time is unclear, but their prolonged rule would not bode well for Egypt’s future.The generals said in an announcement read on state television on Wednesday that they were suspending the constitution and installing an interim government, led by the chief of the constitutional court. The first test will be whether they allow top civilian and religious leaders to devise a way to replace that government with elections. The sooner, the better. All decisions should be transparent.Throughout the day, the atmospherics were ominous and the risk of bloodshed real. The military deployed tanks and troops in Cairo and other cities. Thousands of the Mr. Morsi’s supporters rallied near the presidential palace and many Islamists armed themselves with makeshift clubs and shields and plastic hard hats. A spokesman for the Muslim Brotherhood defiantly vowed that the group would “stand in front of the tanks.” By the end of the night, Mr. Morsi was in military custody and blocked from all communications, one of his advisers told The Times.Fewer countries are more invested in Egypt than the United States, which relies on Cairo to uphold the 1979 peace treaty with Israel. Still, the Obama administration has little leverage over either Mr. Morsi or the opposition, which more often than not held Washington at arm’s length. It has somewhat more influence with the military to whom it provides $1.3 billion in annual aid.Given this complex dynamic, President Obama has reacted with appropriate caution to Mr. Morsi’s ouster. In a statement, he expressed deep concern over the military’s action, urged all sides to exercise restraint and reiterated that the United States takes no side except to support democracy and the rule of law. Mr. Obama was right to try and work with Mr. Morsi after he was elected and to withhold major economic or other new aid when he failed to work with the opposition. Under American law, Mr. Obama may have to withhold future aid if Egypt’s democratic processes are not quickly restored.