https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/08/world/asia/south-korea-north-propaganda-broadcasts-bomb.html
South Korea to Resume Propaganda Broadcasts That Angered North - The New York Times
Nuclear Tests,Propaganda,North Korea,South Korea,Nuclear Weapons,Speakers (Audio),Kim Jong-un,Park Geun-hye,International Relations
Jan. 7, 2016
61
SEOUL, South Korea — A day after North Korea claimed to have tested a hydrogen bomb, South Korea said Thursday that it would resume propaganda broadcasts at the countries’ border that infuriated the North last summer.The South will turn on its batteries of so-called propaganda loudspeakers at the heavily armed border at noon Friday, said Cho Tae-yong, a senior national security adviser to President Park Geun-hye. In August, the Koreas appeared on the verge of armed conflict partly because of the broadcasts, which the South used to blare news of the outside world and criticism of Pyongyang, as well as bouncy South Korean pop music, into the tightly controlled country.Mr. Cho’s announcement came after top national security officials met in Seoul to discuss a response to the North’s nuclear test on Wednesday. North Korea said it had detonated a hydrogen bomb, a vastly more powerful weapon than the nuclear devices it has tested three times before, but experts were extremely skeptical of that claim.South Korean officials said privately Thursday that resuming the propaganda broadcasts was the simplest and quickest way they could think of, for now, to retaliate for the test. They insisted on anonymity while agreeing to discuss their thinking on a sensitive security issue. Like the United States, the South has few options for punishing the North for its nuclear ambitions, which it has continued to pursue despite decades of international sanctions and resolutions from the United Nations Security Council.North Korea did not immediately respond to Mr. Cho’s announcement.While loudspeakers may seem a trivial response to a nuclear test, there is little doubt that the broadcasts enrage the leadership in Pyongyang, which rigorously controls what information North Koreans receive and sees the propaganda as an attempt to undermine its authority. The Cold War-era tactic had gone unused by the South for 11 years until last summer, after two South Korean border guards were maimed by land mines, which the South accused the North of planting.North Korea then threatened to attack the loudspeakers, which it said sullied the “dignity of our supreme leadership,” and put its military on what it called a “semi-war” footing, moving more troops to the border. The crisis was defused after top officials from both Koreas met in talks at the border on Aug. 25. North Korea expressed “regret” over the wounding of the border guards, and South Korea agreed to stop the broadcasts unless an “abnormal situation” developed.On Thursday, South Korean officials said the nuclear test qualified as an abnormal situation. “The North’s fourth nuclear test is a violation not only of its obligations to the U.N. Security Council but also of the Aug. 25 inter-Korean agreement,” Mr. Cho said.He also said the South’s military was ready to respond if the North reacted to the renewed broadcasts with armed hostilities. “We will punish sternly if the North provokes,” he said.