http://www.nytimes.com/2006/02/03/movies/celebrating-boris-karloff-the-monster-and-the-man.html
Celebrating Boris Karloff, the Monster and the Man - The New York Times
FILM FORUM,KARLOFF  BORIS,MOTION PICTURES,ACTORS AND ACTRESSES,FRANKENSTEIN (MOVIE)
Feb. 3, 2006
9484
HE was billed, in the opening credits of the movie that made him a star, as "?". Seventy minutes later, the end credits of James Whale's 1931 "Frankenstein" gave a name to the unrecognizable actor who had incarnated (if that's the word) the unnatural creation of Dr. F., and a fine monster-movie name it was: Boris Karloff. The mysterious Karloff was in fact a middle-aged, middlingly successful English character actor (born William Henry Pratt), skillful and professional enough to have appeared in dozens of pictures in the previous 15 years, yet stubbornly obscure: when he was suggested as a possibility for "Frankenstein," Whale is said to have responded, "Boris -- who?"Film Forum is celebrating the 75th anniversary of that horror classic with a weeklong retrospective devoted to the odd career of this unlikely star, who was versatile enough to avoid being identified exclusively with the part that made him a household name, but was never quite able to extricate himself from the horror genre, the unwholesome origin of his fame. The Film Forum series, which begins today with a double bill of "Frankenstein" and the berserk, jaw-droppingly racist "Mask of Fu Manchu" (1932), consists of 14 pictures -- about a tenth of Karloff's daunting body of work -- and you can't help noticing that all but three of them were released between 1931 and 1935. That is to say, the last 34 years of his life, during which he showed up for work on more than 60 films, are represented in the retrospective by one lonely movie per decade: "The Body Snatcher" (1945), "The Haunted Strangler" (1958) and "Targets" (1968).This is sad, but it's not unreasonable. After the brief horror boom of the early 30's, when Universal's adaptations of "Dracula" (1930) and "Frankenstein" did big business and monsters and mad scientists were the flavors of the half decade, the genre got lazy and shoddy with dismaying speed -- to the point where Karloff, its greatest star, would eventually have to take roles in Abbott and Costello movies and, later, beach party pictures, just to keep the wolf from the door. In the 50's and 60's, he was more a figurehead than a viable monster: an elderly and, by then, rather frail-looking gent making his living as a frightener of children.So this series rightly focuses on Karloff in the "Frankenstein" era, when the craftsmanship of the genre that was his destiny was at least defensible and actors could concentrate on the fruitful labor of creating a character rather than on the fruitless, soul-wearying task of clinging to the fraying threads of their dignity. When he had the chance, Karloff was a pretty good actor. His lurching, baffled newborn monster in "Frankenstein" is a beautiful and imaginative piece of work, a perfectly economical little poem on the perils of poor impulse control. The startling poignancy of this lethal brute is a clear influence on "King Kong," which came out two years later; it's also the closest point of contact between Whale's "Frankenstein" and the brilliant 1818 Mary Shelley novel from which the movie is -- otherwise not too faithfully -- adapted.The scary-but-sympathetic mode was often effective for Karloff, whose eyes were rather sensitive, whose voice was soft and sonorous and whose lisping diction was always touchingly precise. In this series you can see that sort of performance not only in "Frankenstein" and Whale's wild, comic sequel, "Bride of Frankenstein" (1935), but also in the dreadful "Raven" (1935), in which Karloff supports, and effortlessly outacts, his Universal horror colleague Bela Lugosi, and in "The Haunted Strangler," an inelegant Jekyll-and-Hyde item in which he alternates smoothly between fuddled decency and helpless homicidal rage. But when pure evil was called for, pure evil was what Karloff conscientiously delivered. It would be a challenge to locate the redeeming humanity in his implacable Fu Manchu, or in the sadistic, Satan-worshipping architect Hjalmar Poelzig (there's a horror-movie name) of Edgar G. Ulmer's baroquely entertaining "Black Cat" (1934). The ominous stillness of his performance in Karl Freund's "Mummy" (1932) is on the unrelievedly terrifying side, too, but that character's relentless malevolence is perhaps partly excused by his having been cooped up in a crypt for several thousand years: his lack of social skills and the general foulness of his mood are, in the circumstances, understandable.And Karloff's best, most profoundly unsettling performance, I think, falls closer to the pure-evil end of the scale than the scary-but-sympathetic. In a too-short respite from schlock, he made three pictures in the mid-40's for the very intelligent horror-film producer Val Lewton, the strongest of which, Robert Wise's "Body Snatcher," is playing Tuesday on a wonderful triple bill with "The Black Cat" and Whale's hilarious black comedy "The Old Dark House" (1932). In "Body Snatcher," Karloff plays an Edinburgh cabman named Gray, who robs graves to supply fresh cadavers for a medical school. (The year is 1831, not long after the scandal of the famous cemetery plunderers Burke and Hare.) What's most alarming about Gray, though, isn't so much his grisly occupation as the glee with which he torments his favorite customer, one Dr. MacFarlane (Henry Daniell), and MacFarlane's idealistic young assistant. Gray affects a kind of grinning servility, a working-class good-enough-for-the-likes-of-me manner, while he takes his awful pleasure in reminding the medical men of their complicity in his crimes. This man's true vocation (and it's clearly a labor of love) is that of corrupter, and he carries the stench of the grave with him wherever he goes. Karloff works here with bushy eyebrows, cold eyes and sudden sepulchral smiles to create a villain of near-Shakespearean heft and complexity: a monster of resentment, like Richard III, and a man who can do good only by doing bad.But roles like that didn't come frequently for Boris Karloff, and he managed somehow to avoid being consumed by bitterness himself. In one of his last pictures, Peter Bogdanovich's "Targets," he plays an old horror star named Byron Orlok, who is finally, after years of increasingly terrible movies, preparing to hang up his monster suit. That's something Karloff never did: he worked to the end -- which came in 1969, when he was 81 -- and remained, to the end, a dutiful and uncomplaining ambassador of horror. A strange fate, perhaps, for an ordinary human being, but Karloff was an actor, with an actor's peculiar wisdom. You can feel, in the scrupulous craftsmanship and moving correctness he brought to even his most thankless parts, a kind of humble gratitude, a knowledge that he had, at least, managed to dodge the worst horror of his profession. Being Boris Karloff, synonym for corruption, death and evil, may have had its drawbacks, but it beat being a question mark.Karloff WeekendThe Boris Karloff retrospective runs through Feb. 9 at Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, west of Avenue of the Americas, South Village, (212) 727-8110; www.filmforum.org. Films are shown as either double or triple features. Today and tomorrow, "Frankenstein" (1931) and "The Mask of Fu Manchu" (1932); Sunday, "Bride of Frankenstein" (1935) and "The Mummy" (1932). Tickets: $10 ($5 for members, 65+ and under 12), available only at the box office on the day of the screening.