https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/09/world/africa/yahya-jammeh-gambia-rejects-vote-defeat-adama-barrow.html
Yahya Jammeh, Gambian President, Now Refuses to Accept Election Defeat - The New York Times
Coups D'Etat and Attempted Coups D'Etat,Elections,Barrow  Adama (1965- ),Jammeh  Yahya,Gambia
Dec. 9, 2016
5574
DAKAR, Senegal — The fate of the presidency in Gambia took a peculiar turn Friday night when the longtime incumbent appeared on state television to announce that he was rejecting the results of last week’s vote that ousted him. He also called for new elections.Seated in front of microphones and between two flags, President Yahya Jammeh rattled off accusations of voter irregularities, from transposed numbers in tabulations to missing numbers that he said left in question the results of the election that handed the presidency to Adama Barrow.“I hereby reject the results in totality,” said Mr. Jammeh, who has been in office for 22 years. “I will not accept the results.”Mr. Jammeh, who first came to power during a coup, said he wanted “fresh and transparent elections, which will be officiated by a God-fearing and independent electoral commission.”Last week, thousands of Gambians took to the streets in celebration after Mr. Jammeh, known for a repressive and eccentric regime criticized by human rights groups and many Western governments, appeared on state television to concede defeat and heartily congratulate Mr. Barrow after the Dec. 1 vote.In addition to outlandish claims that he could cure AIDS with prayer, a concoction of herbs and a banana, Mr. Jammeh was notorious for jailing opponents — at least two of whom died in prison this year — as well as carrying out so-called witch hunts and saying that gay people should be beheaded.Many in Gambia, the smallest country on the African continent, were stunned that a man who once predicted he would rule a billion years if it was the will of God would give up power so easily. Now, it appears he may not relinquish power after all.Mr. Jammeh’s announcement came as a blow to many Gambians, who feared that it would catapult the nation into tumult and even violence after several days of glimmering hope for a new beginning. In his speech, Mr. Jammeh said his security forces were on “full alert.’’Abdoulie Ceesay, a computer science student at the University of Gambia, described the mood inside the country as “scary.”“We are shocked here, everyone is shocked. This is not what we had expected. We aren’t sure what actually is looming toward our country,” Mr. Ceesay said. “Jammeh is capable of anything.”Senegal, which borders Gambia, and the United States swiftly condemned Mr. Jammeh’s announcement. The State Department called it a “reprehensible and unacceptable breach of faith” and “an egregious attempt to undermine a credible election process and remain in power illegitimately.”It was not immediately clear how Mr. Barrow, a real estate agent thrust into the candidacy with no political experience, would respond. He called an emergency meeting with other party officials late Friday night.