https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/02/sports/tennis/nick-kyrgios-and-dustin-brown-dazzle-in-a-five-set-spectacle-at-wimbledon.html
Nick Kyrgios Defeats Dustin Brown in a Five-Set Spectacle at Wimbledon - The New York Times
Tennis,Wimbledon Tennis Tournament,Kyrgios  Nick,Brown  Dustin (Tennis)
July 1, 2016
9758
WIMBLEDON, England — With no Rafael Nadal at Wimbledon this year, one had to settle on Friday for a match on Court 2 between two men who have upset Nadal at Wimbledon.Not that Nick Kyrgios versus Dustin Brown was tennis to which Nadal could easily relate. For Nadal, a point is a prize to be earned with hard labor: meticulously, ponderously considered, with his shorts-picking and face-wiping before each serve, and then fiercely contested with all the corner-to-corner sweat and hustle a supreme baseliner and competitor can muster.Kyrgios vs. Brown was tennis from another planet, the points, the winners, the errors and the running dialogue piling up at breakneck pace.If not for the rain delays, still a Wimbledon trademark on the outside courts, it would have been entertainment perfectly suited to today’s limited attention spans. But even so, the two showmen required only a preposterous two hours five minutes of playing time to complete a five-set match.That would have been speedy even for Kyrgios’s grass-loving Australian forebears in the days when players did not bother sitting down on changeovers and when serve and volley was the rule instead of the exception.Kyrgios won this five-set sprint, 6-7 (3), 6-1, 2-6, 6-4, 6-4, to advance to the third round and keep alive the very real and very enticing possibility of his facing Andy Murray in the round of 16.“That’s what I want to see,” said Greg Rusedski, the former British star and United States Open finalist, who was one of many tennis luminaries who stopped by Court 2 for a visit.Kyrgios, at this stage, is not just a magnet for the paparazzi or the casual fan who wants to watch a young, phenomenally gifted man on the verge of either a nervous breakdown or a spectacular, not entirely reasonable winner.He is a magnet for his peers and predecessors as well.“I love watching him,” Rusedski said. “If I am going to pay for a ticket, I am going to pay to watch Kyrgios, because you never, never know what to expect. It’s kind of like John McEnroe during those days, but McEnroe had a little bit more consistency of thought on court than Nick has at the moment. So, for me, I think every ingredient is there and the X factor is there, and I hope Nick can find a coach he can work with to fulfill his true potential.”All of that is easy to agree with, but the crazy thing on Friday was that Kyrgios was often not the most telegenic and unpredictable player on Court 2. Brown, a dreadlocked 31-year-old German, has an even bigger taste for risk than Kyrgios does. Putting them on opposite sides of the net only seemed to egg both of them on.At times (a lot of times), it felt more like an exhibition than a Grand Slam match as the trick shots and the wild-swinging misses piled up. Brown ended up with the trick shot of the day: a between-the-legs half-volley drop-shot winner that was not just showboating, because he hit it after a net cord had forced a last-minute adjustment. But there was plenty of hot-dogging, too: routine shots made difficult, as well as difficult shots made to look ridiculously easy.“Made me feel horrendous,” Kyrgios said of Brown’s tweener drop-shot winner. “There were times out there where you literally don’t want to play. You just want to put the racket down. That’s what you get from him. He’s going to hit jumping backhands that are going to hit the fence, but then he’s going to hit three of the greatest volleys that you’ve ever seen.”Of the 288 points, only one was longer than eight shots, and only 45 were longer than four shots. The much longer exchanges were between Kyrgios and the chair umpire Jake Garner, who triggered Kyrgios’s persecution complex — no great challenge — in the first game of the third set when he ruled that Kyrgios had struck a ball after two bounces coming forward in pursuit of one of Brown’s standard-issue drop shots that were more like iron shots with all their backspin.Kyrgios took exception to the ruling, then proceeded to stew over it for the rest of the set, which he lost, picking up a well-deserved code violation for an audible obscenity after being broken in the second game.Actually, it was more than one audible obscenity, but we — like Kyrgios — digress. The essential point is that when Kyrgios, still just 21, finally figures out how to channel his emotions and avoid getting distracted by the little things, it is going to mean big-time trouble for just about every tennis player on earth or grass.“I was definitely not any better or worse at 21,” Brown said of Kyrgios’s behavior Friday. “The guy is 18 in the world. The guy is 21. Let the guy play tennis. I’m pretty sure in a few years, he will also have that sorted, and then he’s probably going to be even better.”That does not mean Kyrgios can’t somehow win Wimbledon this year. With his huge serve and soft hands, he is tailor-made for the All England Club, if not for its garden parties. But for now he remains a dark horse and a moody young interviewee who is trying harder to roll with probing questions but still eventually rises to the bait.So it went Friday after he was asked near the end of a news conference full of behavioral queries whether he was concerned that opponents he did not know as well as Brown might be put off by the language he directed at the umpire?Kyrgios initially took that to mean foul language, which he insisted was not the case. Another reporter specified that Kyrgios had told Garner he was doing “a horrendous job.”“Is that bad language?” Kyrgios said, leaning into the debate. “Have you never said a swear word before? Have you never said a swear word in your life?”This went on for a while, the headline already guaranteed. But there is much more to Kyrgios than a foul mouth and a chip on both rounded shoulders, which by the way make one wonder if he is going to be able to avoid back problems over the many grueling seasons to come.Then again, Pete Sampras slouched, too, and he won 14 Grand Slam titles even if he very rarely treated chair umpires like lower forms of life.“In Australia, there’s no question that Nick’s under a lot of scrutiny,” said Wally Masur, Kyrgios’s former Davis Cup captain. “But I suppose my take on it is, maybe we can all just take a deep breath and exhale.”Just don’t stop watching. You never know what might happen while you’re looking the other way.