http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/10/washington/10chao.html
Elaine L. Chao, Departing Secretary of Labor, Fends Off Critics - The New York Times
Labor Department,Chao  Elaine L,United States Politics and Government,Labor
Jan. 9, 2009
6176
WASHINGTON — Secretary of Labor Elaine L. Chao, the only member of President Bush’s cabinet to serve a full eight years, has heard a flood of criticisms that her department favored business and was lax on enforcement and worker safety.But in an interview, Ms. Chao laid into her critics, asserting that the Bush Labor Department deserved to be praised, not damned. To make her case, she noted that occupational fatalities fell to a record low last year, as did mining fatalities. Moreover, the rate of workplace injuries has declined to record lows, she said, while the department has helped workers win a record amount of back pay for minimum wage and overtime violations.All this is the result of smart enforcement, Ms. Chao asserted, saying that her critics, usually from labor unions, were often unfair and inflammatory.“I think they’ve been partisan,” she said on Thursday. “This department handles some of the most difficult issues, some of the most partisan issues, because there really are different world views on the work force.”Many critics see things differently.“We don’t think the secretary serves the interests of workers very effectively,” said Bill Samuel, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.’s director of government affairs. “There have been virtually no new regulations on workplace hazards except those required by the courts. And she seemed to take the side of employers more than workers when there were conflicts.”Ms. Chao said unions had misunderstood her enforcement strategy, which she calls “compliance assistance” and which involves cooperating with companies.“We have many rules and regulations that can be sometimes confusing and complicated,” she said. “By reaching out to the employer community and educating them on what their responsibilities and obligations are to their work force, that, along, with strong enforcement, is the best way to protect workers.”Ms. Chao, who is married to Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, said the department had accomplished much during her tenure. It has updated regulations on overtime, pensions and the Family and Medical Leave Act, especially to help families that have to care for wounded veterans. It has collected $1.4 billion in back wages for workers, and gotten union officials to reimburse tens of millions of dollars in embezzled and misspent money. She also said her department had worked hard to improve job training, for instance, expanding the role of community colleges in teaching job skills.“This administration has accomplished a great deal at the Department of Labor to benefit America’s labor force,” she said. “I’m the first secretary of labor in the 21st century, and the competitiveness of the American work force and the modernization of decades-old regulations have been among our top priorities.”Ms. Chao’s critics said occupational deaths and injuries had declined as a result of the economy’s shifting to services from manufacturing. They say her department greatly increased mining enforcement and fines only after the Sago and Crandall Canyon mine disasters. And critics say the record collection of back wages is a result of companies’ rushing to settle with her department to reduce the likelihood of facing large amounts of damages awarded by juries in private lawsuits.“It feels like when my kids boast I’m getting a ‘C’ rather than a ‘D,’ ” said Kim Bobo, executive director of Interfaith Worker Justice, a group of religious and labor leaders that seeks to help low-wage workers. “What they’ve done is a drop in the bucket compared to the size of the problem of wage theft.”