https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/18/us/stay-safe-out-there.html
Stormy Weather? Here’s How to Stay Safe. - The New York Times
Lightning,Deaths (Fatalities)
July 18, 2017
916
From 2006 through 2016, 352 people in the United States were killed by lightning strikes, and many more were seriously injured. What should you do when a thunderstorm is in the air? Here are tips from the National Weather Service.— LIZETTE ALVAREZAre you inside? Lightning can sneak up on you through plumbing and wires. Don’t wash hands, dishes or take a shower. Don’t use your computer. Stay away from windows, doors and porches.Are you outside? Thunder means lightning is close by, even if it sounds far away. Take shelter immediately in a sturdy building. No building nearby? Get inside a car (but not a convertible). Keep the windows up and don’t touch the ignition, radio or steering wheel. On a boat? Go inside the cabin. No cabin? Lie low. You never want to be the tallest object. Wait 30 minutes until the last rumble to go outside. Lightning can strike 10 miles from a storm.Are you camping? A man in Florida died this month when a lightning storm broke out while he was camping. Avoid open fields and the tops of hills or ridges. Stay away from tall, isolated trees.Are you swimming? If you are in the water, get out. Avoid contact with metal. Metal and water do not attract lightning, but they are conductors of electricity.Are you playing golf? Most courses in Florida have sirens to alert players that a lightning storm is on the way. Holding a club aloft in a storm is particularly unwise. But in fact, more people have been killed while playing soccer than while playing golf.Are you at work? Farmhands and ranch workers have been the most frequent victims of deadly lightning: Of those who died from 2007 to 2016, 31 percent held those jobs. Roofers also face high risk.Are you in Seattle? After Florida, Texas has the most deaths from lightning, followed by Louisiana, Mississippi, Arkansas and Oklahoma. Washington State residents are the least likely to die from a lightning strike.Are you a gambler? You have a 1-in-13,500 chance of being struck during your lifetime, and a 1-in-1,083,000 chance of being hit in a single year.