https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/17/opinion/britains-dangerous-urge-to-go-it-alone.html
Britain’s Dangerous Urge to Go It Alone - The New York Times
Editorials,Referendums,European Union,Europe,Great Britain,Great Britain Withdrawal from EU (Brexit)
June 17, 2016
4721
Britain’s moment of truth is fast approaching. Next Thursday, the country will vote on whether to remain in or to leave the European Union. The referendum has generated a torrent of analyses, commentaries and appeals — including President Obama’s urging Britain to stay in. Most serious studies have concluded that Britain would be economically and politically damaged by “Brexit,” a British exit from the E.U.And yet the chorus of disgruntled voters convinced that bureaucrats in Brussels are threatening their identity, sovereignty and values, and also packing their island with foreigners, is growing by the day. This British version of “make America great again” is every bit as illusory as Donald Trump’s slogan — and just as potentially dangerous, for Britain and for its European and North American partners. The campaign has generated powerful emotions. On Thursday, after the shooting death of Jo Cox, a Labour Party politician who has been a strong voice for staying in the union, both sides suspended all campaigning.There will be concrete consequences for Britain if it severs itself from the union. It would lose tariff-free access to its largest trading market, or be forced to make big concessions. It would have to negotiate its own trade pacts with other nations, and would have much less bargaining heft. The anti-union crowd promises that freedom from E.U. regulation will bring economic gains, but Britons will have to write their own protections, in areas from the environment to banking.There is no argument that the European Union is a flawed institution. Its dysfunction has been on display in its fitful handling of the Greek debt and refugee crises, its bureaucracy is pathetically slow to recognize or correct its failings and it often acts like an out-of-touch and undemocratic elite. Part of that is the inherent inefficiency of an institution of 28 member states with big differences in size, wealth and democratic traditions, and which participate to different degrees in the single currency and border-free zone.Yet the E.U. is an extraordinary achievement, a voluntary union of nations whose histories include some of the bloodiest wars ever waged. However flawed the bloc, it has replaced blood feuds with a single market, shared values, free travel and labor mobility. Britain has always been something of an outlier in the E.U., joining what began as the European Coal and Steel Community two decades after it was formed and declining to participate in either the euro currency or the borderless Schengen zone. Yet there is no question that Britain has benefited from membership, both economically and as a strong voice in shaping E.U. policy.The euroskepticism that has led to the British referendum, and that forms a strong component of the right-wing nationalist parties on the rise in many European countries, is not about efficiency or history. It is about ill-defined frustration with the complexities of a changing world and a changing Europe, a loss of faith in mainstream politicians and experts, a nostalgia for a past when nations decided their own fates and kept foreigners out. To those who hold these views, the European Union is the epitome of all that has gone wrong, an alien bureaucracy deaf to the traditions and values of its members. Not surprisingly, Mr. Trump and the French politician Marine Le Pen both favor Brexit.But there is no turning back the clock, and an exit could create new problems at home — like a Scotland that would want to go ahead and break with Britain in order to stay in the E.U. And apart from the financial chaos and damage it would do to Britain, a vote to leave would encourage euroskeptics across the Continent, putting the entire European project at risk. Britain’s exit, in short, would be a disaster.To the skeptics, though, President Obama, the International Monetary Fund, the German government and all the others who have argued against a departure are only the predictable voices of the global order they want to escape. The hope at this stage rests on the Britons who understand what is at stake. Every one of their votes is critical next Thursday.