https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/27/opinion/health-care-mcconnell-trumpcare-cbo.html
The Health Care Hoax Has Been Exposed, Senator McConnell - The New York Times
Senate,Republican Party,Law and Legislation,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010),Congressional Budget Office,McConnell  Mitch,United States Politics and Government
June 27, 2017
3694
Senator Mitch McConnell hoped that keeping his wretched bill to destroy the Affordable Care Act secret until the last minute would make it easier for him to railroad fellow Republicans. The facts the majority leader had hoped to suppress came back to bite him on Monday when the Congressional Budget Office released a detailed review of the bill that confirmed what governors, doctors and indeed the American public had been saying for days: The bill is a cruel hoax that would help the wealthiest Americans at the expense of the poorest.With members of his own party balking at even bringing the measure to the Senate floor, Mr. McConnell announced on Tuesday that a vote would be delayed until after the July 4 recess. A wiser course — for his party as well as the nation — would be to concede defeat and give up what now seems a desperate quest to fulfill a seven-year-old party commitment to kill an Obama-era program that, as it turns out, a large number of Americans would like to see preserved and improved.The budget office said the measure would leave 22 million more Americans without insurance by 2026. Hit hardest would be lower-income people between the ages of 50 and 64 and people struggling with chronic illness or battling addiction — many of the same voters who believed President Trump’s promises to improve their health care. The bill would cut $772 billion over the next decade from Medicaid, which covers most of America’s poor children and nursing home patients, to help finance tax cuts for the wealthy.Some Republican senators — Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, Rand Paul of Kentucky, Ted Cruz of Texas — actually complain that the bill is too generous and doesn’t deliver sufficient spending cuts. But others — Susan Collins of Maine, Rob Portman of Ohio, Dean Heller of Nevada — have listened to those who are outraged that they’d even consider such a harmful measure.Having drafted a bill so indefensible on the merits, Mr. McConnell and his allies promoted it with fibs. Mr. McConnell, for instance, claimed it would “strengthen Medicaid.” John Cornyn of Texas said it would “save the people who are currently being hurt.”It will be interesting to hear what the voters have to say during the July 4 break. Some states that would be most deeply hurt by the bill are represented by Republicans who back it. Looking at you, Richard Burr of North Carolina; Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania; and Mr. Cornyn, the majority whip hellbent on forcing a vote this week.And then there’s Mr. McConnell. Under Obamacare, the majority leader’s home state, Kentucky, experienced one of the biggest reductions in the rate of uninsured people of any state in the nation, according to a study from the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation, mostly because of gains in Medicaid coverage. Last year, more than 81,000 Kentuckians purchased coverage in the federal marketplace.Even so, despite all evidence, Mr. McConnell seems determined to impose his will and deny these very same people access to the benefits of Obamacare when he returns to Washington.What has blocked the bill’s progress on Capitol Hill, at least for now, is that ordinary Americans have begun to pay attention to the facts instead of the fearmongering and falsehoods emanating from the White House and the congressional leadership. Let’s hope the system works, and elected representatives listen to the people who stand to lose.