https://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/25/sports/basketball/25knicks.html
Marbury and Knicks Agree on a Buyout - The New York Times
Marbury  Stephon,New York Knicks,Basketball
Feb. 24, 2009
7469
Stephon Marbury, whose New York homecoming began with fanfare and ended in infamy, finally severed ties with the Knicks on Tuesday, ending a tense, three-month standoff with the franchise.Marbury agreed to a contract buyout after a four-hour meeting with Donnie Walsh, the team’s president, and was granted his release. The team filed a waiver request after the N.B.A. was closed for business, so the 48-hour waiver process will begin Wednesday morning.Marbury will be eligible to sign with a new team  Friday. According to multiple news media outlets, he intends to sign with the defending champion Boston Celtics.By gaining his release before March 1, Marbury will be eligible to play in the postseason with his new team.A Knicks spokesman said  Walsh would not comment until Wednesday, before the Knicks’ home game against Orlando. Marbury did not respond to an e-mail message seeking comment.In an e-mail message to The Boston Globe, Marbury said he was “blessed to be able to move on with my career.”He added, “I’m excited about the new beginning.”The Knicks issued a joint statement Tuesday confirming that Marbury had been released, and that his grievance against the team had been settled.“A comprehensive agreement was made this afternoon between the New York Knicks and Stephon Marbury,” the statement read. “Under its terms, the grievance has been resolved and the Knicks have requested waivers on Stephon. No additional terms will be disclosed.”With that, Marbury’s rocky five-year tenure with the Knicks, his hometown team, came to a close. A two-time All-Star, Marbury led the Knicks to the playoffs  once, in 2004, and never led them to a winning record.Instead, Marbury’s Knicks career was characterized by controversy. He feuded with coaches Larry Brown and Isiah Thomas and alienated teammates with his sour demeanor and his penchant for stirring up trouble. He also was a central figure in a sexual-harassment lawsuit against Thomas, the former team president, who acquired Marbury from the Phoenix Suns in  January 2004.Marbury’s Knicks career effectively ended on opening night of this season, when Mike D’Antoni, the Knicks’ new coach, benched him for the entire game. D’Antoni described the decision as tactical, saying he said he wanted to play the Knicks’ younger guards, but it is well known that D’Antoni was wary of Marbury’s reputation as a locker-room tempest.Marbury twice declined a chance to play in late November, after the roster was decimated by trades and injuries. Marbury’s second refusal caused the Knicks to suspend him and withhold his salary for two games.Attempts to negotiate a buyout began shortly thereafter.  Talks stalled after Marbury stormed out of a  negotiating session Dec. 1. The sides did not meet again until Tuesday, when they attended a grievance hearing over the $400,000 in docked salary. Marbury was joined at the hearing by Hal Biagas, a lawyer for the players union who has been his adviser. Walsh represented the Knicks.The hearing itself was apparently brief and quickly became a full-blown negotiation that encompassed  the grievance and the buyout talks. It is believed that Marbury agreed to drop the grievance and to forfeit around $2 million from his $20.8 million salary.The Knicks had been asking Marbury to give back between $2 million and $3 million since the process began. Marbury initially offered to give up $1 million, then withdrew the offer.But the calendar provided an impetus to negotiate. Under N.B.A. rules, a player must be waived by March 1 to be eligible to play for another team in the postseason. Had the Knicks held on to Marbury through next weekend, his season — and any chance at quick redemption — would effectively be over.Marbury also needs to get on the court to prove he can still contribute to a winning team and to re-establish his market value. He has not played in a regular-season game since Jan. 11, 2008. It is believed the Celtics will sign Marbury to a prorated deal at the veteran’s minimum. He will be a free agent again this summer.