http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/08/world/africa/congolese-militia-leader-convicted-in-attack-on-village.html
Congolese Militia Leader Convicted in Attack on Village - The New York Times
Congo  Democratic Republic of (Congo-Kinshasa),War Crimes  Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity,Sex Crimes,International Criminal Court,Katanga  Germain
March 7, 2014
8698
PARIS —  The International Criminal Court on Friday convicted a militia leader from the Democratic Republic of Congo in an attack on a Congolese village in 2003 in which more than 200 people were shot and hacked to death, and women were raped and abducted to serve as sex slaves.The militia leader, Germain Katanga, was found guilty by two of the three judges at the court in The Hague of complicity in organizing the attack on the village of Bogoro and providing guns to speed the killing. He was acquitted of charges of rape and the use of child soldiers.Mr. Katanga’s conviction is only the second in the decade since the court’s work began. The other guilty verdict, in March 2012, involved Thomas Lubanga, a militia leader who was among Mr. Katanga’s enemies in the Ituri region of Congo, where years of fighting have been fueled by ethnic strife and rivalries for power and mineral riches.A third militia leader, Mathieu Ngudjolo, who had stood trial with Mr. Katanga and led an allied fighting group, was acquitted in December 2012.All three cases have been marked by uncertain witness testimony and what critics say is a lack of prosecutorial evidence. Lawyers following the proceedings say the cases have illustrated the hurdles faced by the court in passing judgment on crimes that happen in shifting bush wars, in distant, almost inaccessible regions where combatants are often mercenaries or children.In their ruling, the judges noted that militia members, wielding machetes and firing indiscriminately, had attacked the village “while its inhabitants were still asleep.”Mr. Katanga had initially been charged with crimes against humanity and war crimes. But toward the end of the trial, two of the judges, citing incomplete evidence, downgraded the charges against him and defined his role as an accomplice to war crimes rather than as a principal perpetrator.The dissenting judge on Friday, Christine van den Wyngaert of Belgium, said that Mr. Katanga should have been acquitted because his trial had lasted too long — Mr. Katanga arrived in The Hague in 2007 — and because the shift in charges had violated his rights as a defendant.His acquittal on the rape charges drew mixed reactions from women’s groups who have long denounced the widespread rape and abduction of women as sex slaves for fighters in the Congolese conflict.Brigid Inder of the Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice, one of the rights groups following the trial, said the judgment was inconsistent. “We are extremely disappointed that the judges appeared to expect a different level of proof” for sexual crimes than for pillaging, murder or destruction of property, she said. The attack on Bogoro, although a “modest” case, she said, was representative of the types of attacks and the types of violence specifically directed against women.Karen Naimer of Physicians for Human Rights said that despite the mixed verdict, progress was made because the International Criminal Court had included charges of sexual violence for the first time.Ms. Naimer said it demonstrated a greater focus on such crimes, “and reminds us just how critical it is to collect, document and preserve forensic medical evidence in order for these cases to succeed.”Mr. Katanga will be sentenced in a separate hearing.