https://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/24/arts/television/in-under-the-dome-a-small-town-gets-smaller.html
In ‘Under the Dome’ a Small Town Gets Smaller - The New York Times
Television,King  Stephen,CBS Corporation,Under the Dome (TV Program)
June 23, 2013
4045
You can say goodbye to your next two Monday nights, and possibly — if past for once is not precedent — the whole summer’s worth.“Under the Dome,” a 13-part CBS mini-series based on the Stephen King novel, gets off to an addictive start on Monday, so much so that it’s hard to imagine any second-episode falloff in viewership. Bite on Part 1 and you’re going to be there for Part 2, or at least the start of it.But the first episode is the easy one. It sets Mr. King’s dandy premise — the small town of Chester’s Mill is sealed off from the rest of the world by a mysterious clear dome — and does so with one cool special-effects flourish after another. The real test of this series will be whether it can sustain interest as Chester’s Mill gets past the initial shock and confusion and settles into its new normal.That has been a stumbling block for adaptations of Mr. King’s work before, as with a version of “Bag of Bones” that A&E offered in 2011. “It has a superficially cinematic quality, but it doesn’t have the storytelling juice to keep you engaged,” Mike Hale wrote in his review in The New York Times.“Under the Dome” has a cinematic pedigree that gives it a good shot at transcending superficiality — Steven Spielberg’s Amblin Television is in the production-partnership mix. And the storytelling (Brian K. Vaughan, a “Lost” veteran, gets the teleplay credit) at least has the potential to be absorbing for 13 episodes. An awful lot seems to be going on in Chester’s Mill even before the dome comes down.As the show opens, one man is furtively burying another in a woods, and the dead fellow did not die of natural causes. The guy doing the shoveling (Mike Vogel), who goes by the nickname Barbie, is a stranger in town, and by the episode’s end he has emerged as a central character and the surprise identity of the man he was burying has been revealed.But there’s more. Within the first eight minutes we also learn that someone at town hall has been stockpiling propane; that two young people (Britt Robertson and Alexander Koch) have different opinions on the meaning of the sex we have just seen them engage in; and that most of the town’s officials and firetrucks are away participating in a parade.Then the crows and cows start to stir. It’s never a good sign when animals get nervous in a Stephen King story, and sure enough, the dome clamps down moments later. For one particular cow standing in exactly the wrong place at exactly the wrong time, this is particularly bad news. The animal’s unpleasant but rather hilarious fate is the first of a series of memorable dome-induced special effects. You don’t realize just how in motion the modern world is until there’s suddenly an invisible wall in the middle of things.The cast here is pretty appealing, especially Mr. Vogel, Rachelle Lefevre (“A Gifted Man”) as the local newspaper editor and Dean Norris (“Breaking Bad”) as a town councilman who seems all too eager to use the crisis to grab power. A plot development near the end of Part 1 suggests that Natalie Martinez, who plays a deputy sheriff, will have more to do as things develop.Most welcome is that no one in Chester’s Mill, at least no one introduced in Part 1, is the type of stereotypical yokel who often turns up in such stories, including those by Mr. King. Though in the novel Chester’s Mill is set in Maine, no wretchedly overdone Down East accents are imposed in this adaptation. (Instead of selectmen — the usual local governance in Maine towns of this size — Chester’s Mill apparently has a town council.)Even the residents who look as if they might be the sort of dimwitted yahoos Hollywood loves to put in small towns turn out to be living in the modern world. In an early scene Ms. Lefevre’s character drops by the home of a frumpy woman in a hoarderish-looking house who has called the newspaper. She assumes the woman is having a problem with home delivery.“I get my news online, sweetheart, like everybody else,” the woman corrects her.By not stereotyping, the series frees itself to be more representative. That can only help it as it goes along, because a good reacting-to-a-crisis story ends up being about more than the few people caught in the cave-in or broken elevator or disabled submarine. “We live in a dome,” Mr. King notes in a video interview on the CBS Web site. “We’re all under the dome. Because so far as we know, this little tiny blue world is all we’ve got.”