http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/01/world/asia/japan-to-review-apology-made-to-wwii-comfort-women.html
Japan to Revisit Apology to Wartime Sex Slaves - The New York Times
Japan,South Korea,Women and Girls,Defense and Military Forces,Prostitution,Abe  Shinzo,World War II (1939-45)
Feb. 28, 2014
5141
TOKYO —  Japan will re-examine a landmark apology it made two decades ago to women forced to work in Japanese wartime military brothels, a government spokesman said on Friday, in a move that could further outrage South Korea, where many of the women came from.The spokesman, Yoshihide Suga, the chief cabinet secretary, said a team of scholars would examine what historical evidence had been used in composing the apology, known as the Kono Statement. The statement, issued in 1993 by the chief cabinet secretary at the time, Yohei Kono, acknowledged for the first time that the Imperial military had been at least indirectly involved in coercing those known euphemistically as “comfort women” to provide sex to Japanese soldiers during World War II.Mr. Suga did not say whether the inquiry could possibly lead to a scrapping of the statement, an action that would most likely draw an explosive reaction from South Korea, where the women are seen as an emotionally potent symbol of their nation’s brutal early-20th-century colonization by Japan.It was also unclear whether Mr. Suga was offering to form the team simply as a way to deflect pressure from Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s supporters in the political far right. They have argued that the statement should be scrapped because, they say, there is insufficient objective evidence supporting the testimony of the women that the Japanese military forced them to provide sex. (Most scholars reject that, saying the military was at least indirectly complicit because it allowed the brothels to operate.)Officials in the Abe administration have said that Mr. Suga does not support discarding the statement because he is well aware that such a move would be condemned in nations like the United States, which view the matter as a human rights issue.Whatever the intent, forming the team of scholars may stir anger from the United States, which has been frustrated by the inability of its two Asian allies to work together to offset the growing strength of China. Visiting American officials have repeatedly urged Mr. Abe, an outspoken conservative, not to engage in historical revisionism that might isolate Japan in the region.For many Koreans, the push by Japanese rightists is seen as proof of a lack of remorse over treatment of the wartime brothel workers and other victims of Japan’s colonization of the Korean Peninsula. South Korea’s president, Park Geun-hye, has refused even to meet with Mr. Abe until Japan shows more contrition on the issue.Friday’s move may also lead to renewed concerns in Washington and elsewhere that Mr. Abe, who struck a pragmatic tone in his first year in office, may be reverting to his earlier nationalistic agenda of challenging what he calls masochistic views of Japan’s wartime history. In recent days, his government has faced growing calls from right-wing lawmakers in Parliament to revisit the Kono Statement. Analysts say they appear to have been encouraged to speak out by Mr. Abe’s visit in December to a contentious Tokyo war shrine.Recently, nationalist lawmakers have demanded that the government look into whether the Kono Statement was based on inadequate evidence. A former official who helped draft it was called in to testify that the main evidence was the testimony of 16 former sex slaves and that no documents were found to collaborate their stories.That testimony seemed to confirm the position of the lawmakers, who have questioned the women’s testimonies, accusing them of being politically motivated. They say the women were not coerced but were prostitutes who worked in the brothels to earn money.On Friday, Mr. Suga appeared to bow to that pressure, saying that a team of researchers would be assembled to look into the statement. He said the team would work in secret, apparently to avoid political interference.“We’d like to launch a team to re-examine and understand the background” of the statement, Mr. Suga told a parliamentary budget committee. “It will be extremely difficult, but it’s important to review and see what the situation was.”The issue began to receive international attention in the early 1990s as hundreds of the wartime brothel workers began to speak out about what had happened to them a half-century earlier.Scholars say that tens of thousands of Korean and other women worked in Japanese military brothels, and many of the survivors, now in their 80s and 90s, say they were tricked or coerced into laboring in wretched conditions that left them sterile for the rest of their lives.