https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/22/magazine/meet-the-unlikely-airbnb-hosts-of-japan.html
Meet the Unlikely Airbnb Hosts of Japan - The New York Times
Airbnb,Travel and Vacations,Japan,Renting and Leasing (Real Estate),Tokyo (Japan),Relaunch-Ebay,Hotels and Travel Lodgings
Feb. 18, 2015
7835
Let me introduce you to Yoppy. Yoppy is young and friendly and lives in a small apartment in the Shinagawa neighborhood of Tokyo. His full name is Yuhsuke Yoshimoto, but at least with visitors who come to stay with him through his listing on Airbnb, he prefers to go by Yoppy. He wears heavy-framed black glasses, has a boyish haircut and likes to talk to foreigners, even though his English is admittedly poor. In the one photo I’ve seen of him — his profile shot on Airbnb — he’s wearing a navy blazer, a collared shirt and a thin silver necklace. He smiles at the camera in a pleasant but not overbearing way. It would be hard, I imagine, not to like Yoppy if you were to meet him at a dinner party or at a gathering of pharmacists or financial planners (according to his profile, Yoppy is both a pharmacist and a financial planner), but still that says little about how you would feel when putting your toothbrush on the sink next to his late at night in a city that’s far, far from home.Amid the million or so rental listings on Airbnb, amid the castles (at last count, there were 1,200 castles) and fantasy beach spreads, amid houseboats and ski gondolas and tree houses in the jungle, amid the scores of assiduously vacuumed urban apartments showcasing vividly printed bedspreads and devotion to Ikea minimalism, Yoppy’s place is eye-catching for being none of that. Its governing aesthetic is what I’d term “salaryman bachelor.” In one photo, there’s a dark brown couch, possibly velour, draped with a rumpled blanket. It sits in an area that is dimly lit and very narrow and has a corporate-looking whiteboard parked in one corner, maybe in the event that something needs diagraming. Another picture shows a different room, bare-walled and completely empty, where a guest can unfold a futon to sleep. The arrangement is simple: Yoppy has his own bedroom off the hallway. He will share the bathroom and kitchen and, if you need it, his hair dryer. When he is not at work, he assures you, he will be eager to hang out. “I am nice to you very much,” is what he promises. All this for $42 a night.Before flying to Japan last fall, I did a crawl through Airbnb’s Tokyo listings. Maybe because I was looking only a week ahead, there wasn’t a whole lot open. But still, there were options. I examined people’s toilets, microwaves and pillowcases. I assessed their cats and dogs, their workout equipment and shelves full of anime-character plushies. I felt voyeuristic and judgmental but, given that it was a business transaction, also entitled to my judgments. There is a guy named Masahiro who has an apartment he’ll share with you, but be aware he already shares it with 10 snakes. Many properties have strident house rules involving not speaking to the neighbors. There were a lot of specifics about how to take out the trash and some polite but emphatic exhortations to not, in general, behave like a cretin. You could add up the various “do nots” to get a sense of all the exasperating things people actually do. This from one male host, under the heading “KEEP CLEAN”:1. Take off your shoes when you get into my house.2. Do not pull your luggage along the floor to prevent damage on the floor.3. Sit on a toilet even when you take a pee (to gentlemen).Relative to other major cities in the world, Tokyo, with its population of 13.4 million, has been slower to embrace Airbnb, with fewer hosts signing on to open their doors to strangers. There are currently about 2,500 listings in the city, less than half of what can be found in Madrid, less than one-fifteenth of what can be found in Paris and about the same as what’s available in Edinburgh, a city of half a million people. For the company, which is aggressively endeavoring to become a global superbrand and markets itself on the idea that the world is an inherently exuberant and welcoming place, this is a concern. In five years, Tokyo will host the Summer Olympics, and with that will come a wash of what the Japanese government predicts will be eight million or so eager visitors on a trip-of-a-lifetime binge, all needing places to stay. It could be an incredible boon for a growth-minded, profit-minded company like Airbnb. But so far, there are not enough Yoppys.This is why, one morning in September, I found myself following a pair of American Airbnb employees and a Japanese translator down a leafy pedestrian street in Jiyugaoka, an upscale residential neighborhood on the southwestern side of Tokyo. The Americans, Anne Kenny and Kathy Lee, were researchers in their mid-30s focused on user experience. They had been dispatched from headquarters in San Francisco to do a four-day anthropological deep dive, interviewing Japanese hosts, most of them designated “superhosts” — people who have excellent reviews from guests and are quick to respond to booking requests — to try to understand whether and how the San Francisco share-everything ethos works in a country like Japan.The air was muggy and smelled faintly of cedar. Japanese commuters glided past on bikes. A flock of girls dressed in school uniforms and frilly knee socks passed us going the other way. Nobody stared, because that would be rude, but they definitely looked. We were not just foreign, but we were also accidentally louder than everyone else, if only because everyone else seemed utterly silent.Our translator, a woman named Fujiko Suda, noticed people noticing. “It’s because no tourists would really come here,” she said. And true enough, inside the hushed morning routine of the neighborhood, it felt as if we had jumped a fence.A couple of months before my trip to Japan, Airbnb overhauled its website and began an extensive effort to rebrand itself, moving away from the notion that it was merely a room-rental platform, or an “online marketplace for accommodation,” as its employees often described it, but rather something warmer and fuzzier and decidedly more expansive. Brian Chesky, Airbnb’s C.E.O. and one of its three founders, announced the rebranding via a lengthy video message aimed at the site’s users — “our community” — in which he unveiled the company’s new credo: “We believe in a world where all seven billion of us can belong anywhere.” He described Airbnb not as a business but rather as a movement, noting how people once lived in villages and understood what it was to feel a sense of belonging, but that over time — thanks to the Industrial Revolution — everything became depersonalized and dispersed and the good stuff eroded. “At a time when we’ve been told to look at each other with suspicion and fear,” he said, “you’re telling the world it’s O.K. to trust again.”Airbnb, which makes its money by charging service fees of 9 to 15 percent on every booking, is reportedly valued at $13 billion, more than Wyndham Worldwide or Hyatt. Since its founding six years ago, the company has booked stays for 30 million people, 20 million of them last year. It now has about 1,500 employees in 20 cities worldwide. Most of the charts plotting its various growth metrics — amount of capital, number of listings — show a steep upward curve, not unlike an arm shot triumphantly at the sky. But still, there are limits, and Airbnb seems to have glimpsed them, realizing that it will continue to grow only in concert with a parallel mind-set, one involving the general reliability of strangers.Can we “belong anywhere?” Should we try? I was thinking about this as we made our way through Jiyugaoka that September day, headed toward the home of an Airbnb host named Haruko Miki, feeling distinctly as if we didn’t belong. We passed a flower shop and a placid little park and then waited at a crossing next to a quiet mother and her quiet toddler for a train to quietly whoosh past. Kenny, who is blond and blue-eyed and has a gentle matter-of-fact nature, piloted us by following 30 pages of turn-by-turn, photo-based instructions she’d received. Thirty pages seemed like a lot, but this was Kenny’s second trip to Tokyo on behalf of the company, and she had already figured out that Japanese hosts tend to be heavy-handed with the directions — in part because they’re trying to be helpful to people navigating the confusing streets, and in part because thoroughness and precision seem to matter for their own sake.Earlier, over breakfast, Lee mentioned the work of a Dutch social psychologist named Geert Hofstede, who developed a matrix of cultural dimensions by which one country could be viewed against another. The original research took place in the 1960s and ’70s, when Hofstede was employed by IBM International and carried out a survey of its employees in 70 countries. Using the IBM data, and later incorporating the research of other social scientists, he came up with six measures to help define and analyze the values, attitudes and behavioral impulses of any group — from something as small as the population of a single office or factory to something as large as a nation. These include individualism versus collectivism, indulgence versus restraint, power distance (a group’s acceptance or rejection of hierarchy) and, perhaps most important for Airbnb, uncertainty avoidance.According to the Hofstede Center, an institute specializing in intercultural business practices, uncertainty avoidance has to do with “the way a society deals with the fact that the future can never be known: Should we try to control the future or just let it happen?” The 30 pages of navigational instructions seemed a vote in favor of control. The center’s portrait describes Japan as a pragmatic culture that emphasizes collectivism and hierarchy and as “one of the most uncertainty-avoiding countries on earth.” (Apparently Greece and Uruguay also don’t enjoy uncertainty.)Lee is tall and willowy and was dressed that day in a sleeveless knit jersey dress. She has a master’s degree in behavioral psychology and another in human-computer interaction and is part of Airbnb’s Insights team, which looks at user data to glean useful information about hosts and guests. Like a majority of people who work at Airbnb, she has been at the company only a couple of years. She and Kenny met when they worked together on user-experience at Microsoft; each moved to Airbnb as its growth went steroidal in 2013. While Kenny focuses on international growth, Lee specializes in doing internal studies on things like why hosts decline bookings (30 to 40 percent of booking requests on the site are rejected) and what people mean exactly when they deem a place “clean.” Back at Airbnb’s offices in San Francisco, Lee told me, a behavioral economist on her team has looked at user data in conjunction with cultural dimensions. “Airbnb doesn’t do as well in collectivist countries,” she said, citing Japan as an example. “But in a place like Australia” — which, like the United States, rates high on individualism and indulgence and low on pragmatism — “it’s huge.”Chesky has characterized Airbnb’s popularity as spreading “house by house, block by block, city by city,” kind of like a faith-in-the-world infection, governed by good will and good behavior, transmitted from one happy traveler to the next, one continent to another. Which brought us back to the challenge at hand. It was hard not to wonder how a company that’s disruptive at its core would be received ultimately in Japan, where harmonious unity — a concept known as wa — is something of a national virtue. How does a storm arrive in a place that’s phobic about storms?A day earlier, before meeting the Airbnb team, I had coffee with a Japanese acquaintance — an English-speaking businesswoman named Chiaki Hayashi, who often travels internationally for work. I arranged to meet her as I was on my way to check in to the place I had booked through Airbnb. It was a cute-looking apartment I would have all to myself, called “Ultimate Tokyo-Sized Experience!!” At $62 per night, it was pricier than Yoppy’s spare room but still about a third of what a decent hotel would cost. Hayashi ran her finger over the map I’d printed out, pinpointing its location near the Shibuya train station, in the busiest part of the city. Ultimate Tokyo-Sized Experience!!, it turned out, sat atop something known as Love Hotel Hill, which was where, she explained, a slew of small establishments rented rooms overnight or by the hour and a lot of people in Tokyo went to have sex.“You mean like prostitutes?” I asked. None of this had been mentioned on the Airbnb listing.“Mainly, no,” Hayashi said. “It’s more young people who live with their parents. But Japanese people really don’t live in that area. They wouldn’t want to.” When I didn’t appear reassured, she smiled and told me not to worry. “It’s not dangerous, not dirty,” she said. “It’s just . . . very . . . specific.”I asked if she thought Airbnb would eventually take off in Japan. Hayashi considered the question awhile, then gave a kind of yes-and-no answer. “Japanese people are very comfortable with the concept of sharing,” she said, citing the close quarters in which many families lived and the tradition of using sentou, communal bath houses. It’s just that they are less accustomed to sharing with outsiders. She mentioned a restaurant nearby with a “No Foreigners” sign in its window and referred also to the fact that her country spent two centuries living under an isolationist government policy that pretty much forbade interaction with the outside world.“We are not familiar living with foreign people,” Hayashi said, giving a lighthearted shrug. “I mean, Japan is an island. It’s like, foreign people. . . . What do you even eat?”Haruko Miki’s house sits at the crest of a gentle hill, a 10-minute walk from the train station. She bowed when she opened the door. She was 75, a widow in white slacks and a hot pink sweater. Inside the entryway, we removed our shoes. Thinking ahead to our departure, Miki leaned down and reoriented each pair so that they faced back toward the door.She spoke virtually no English, though she did have one go-to phrase — “green towels” — which she usually deployed right off the bat when showing Airbnb guests around her place, demarcating the line between what was theirs and what was hers. Their sheets are green; their towels are green; hers are not. The system seems to work. Miki’s house is small by most American standards, but by Japanese standards, it’s large. There are a couple of bedrooms upstairs, where her oldest daughter lives with her husband and their three children, and some sort of open loft area, where someone had the television turned up loud. Miki is slim and grandmotherly and told us, through the translator, that for years she has made a good living selling Tupperware to friends. She signed up for Airbnb 14 months earlier, when a friend of her daughter’s, who was already hosting, suggested she might like it, for both the sociability and the money. After she served tea, Miki walked us through a compact living room and a galley kitchen and then down a hallway past her own bedroom to a second tiny room.“This is where the visitors sleep,” she said, as the rest of us took turns stepping in to look. Its floor was covered by traditional straw-mat tatami. There were two green futons folded up against the wall. A single window covered in rice paper filtered the light from outside. She’d had Australians, Italians, Mexicans, Chileans, Chinese, Canadians and also, because she happens to be fluent in Korean, a good number of Koreans come through. “When I signed up, I thought it would be one or two a month, but it’s all the time,” she says. “Last month, I had only two days off.” A family from New York — a mother, father and baby — was staying there at the time. There was no sign of them, except some luggage piled neatly in one corner. Miki had just done their laundry, which was drying on the patio outside.Then she donned a red apron, heated a frying pan and started making us lunch. Kenny and Lee were recording everything Miki said. They snapped photos of the knickknacks on her shelves and the guest book in which people wrote comments about their stays. The study Kenny and Lee were making was at once methodical and impressionistic, an attempt to build a portrait of host-guest dynamics in Japan to be delivered back to San Francisco for further discussion. They would later note that Miki, despite appearing as an older woman in an apron, was both an entrepreneur and an adventurer, as evidenced by her career in Tupperware and the fact, as she told us, that she celebrated her 50th birthday in the Australian outback, sky diving over Ayer’s Rock. Airbnb’s mission, in part, was to identify and encourage outliers like Miki. It’s how the service has gained footing in every new market — adopted first by the risk-takers and then normalized over time. Kenny asked each person a set list of questions, the final and arguably most important one being, “How can we find more people like you?”Miki, hearing the question, laughed. In an incredibly short time, she had produced a plate of scallion pancakes, a bowl of peanuts sautéed with spices, some pickled daikon radishes and a pile of potatoes cut into perfect little pyramids, fried until crisp and then tossed in a sticky sweet sauce. She mentioned that some of her friends were interested in renting out their spare rooms, but their husbands wouldn’t allow it. “They say, ‘I will do it when my husband dies.’ ” She added that her own husband never would have approved of the menagerie of strangers now coming through their house. “You know, Japanese are really. . . . ” She paused, searching for the right words. “They just don’t want to bring foreigners to Japan.”She herself had a high tolerance for all of it, for the people who came and the stilted conversations conducted largely through hand gestures, for the puddles they left on her bathroom floor, the laundry she did free of charge, the loads of food they consumed at her table and the way they sometimes threw their clothes all over her tatami room. She was even tolerant of the French, who she admitted, when pressed, could be the most challenging guests of all. It was a labor, to be sure, but it was profitable, and it also seemed to mean something to her. One of her daughters lived in Los Angeles for eight years, and Miki had gone for extended visits. She knew acutely what it felt like to be dislocated, the stun of a country that’s not your own. She offered a steadying, if not particularly glamorous, refuge. She served people tea made with herbs from her garden and rice cakes wrapped in seaweed. She unfolded their green-sheeted futons before bed at night.The more we talked with Miki, the more I wanted to go lie on her couch in front of her knickknack cabinet and wait for the next warm meal. My place, Ultimate Tokyo-Sized Experience!!, turned out to be clean and quiet (as advertised) but also strange and lonely. It was a spare, single bedroom, not more than eight feet wide, with a narrow foldout futon, a minifridge, minitelevision and minimicrowave and a flimsy door, behind which was a bathroom just big enough to fit a body. Like a lot of Airbnb listings, it was rented as “entire place” rather than “private room,” which meant no host was in residence. But in this case, I’m not sure any host was ever in residence. The listing was run by some sort of conglomerate or management company, and checking in involved no human interaction whatsoever. To get there, I carried my luggage up a neon-lit hill — past something called Hotel Fifteen Love, past places called Pub Slow Jam, Adult Shop Joyful and Baby Doll and a pet store that sold fluffed-up puppies and kittens and still somehow managed to look seedy — to the concrete apartment building where it was located. The door was unlocked. A key had been left inside. I had no idea where I’d landed.Miki, despite the language barrier, seemed to know a lot about her guests. She described a woman who came to stay with her while she was on business in Japan and developed heat exhaustion, or maybe just exhaustion in general. (“She was so busy,” observed Miki.) There was a young guy who arrived from Korea, saying he just wanted to get away from his parents, who were pestering him to get married. (“He needed some quiet,” she said.) An Italian man came to stay and cried the whole time, confessing to Miki that he had cheated on his Japanese wife and now she’d left him. “I took him to the Emperor’s Palace to try and cheer him up,” she told us, adding that it didn’t work at all. Somewhere along the way, though, she delivered the kind of blunt-force, stranger-to-stranger advice that cuts handily across cultures. The man’s wife eventually took him back, Miki informed us, and she was happy to claim some of the credit: “I told him,” she said, shaking a finger as she described it, “he just had to stop with the affairs.”Last winter, Airbnb conducted focus groups in Tokyo, gathering people who knew nothing about the service and showing them the Japanese-language version of the Airbnb website on smartphones, complete with the castles and the tree houses, the full flight of whimsy. Anne Kenny was part of the group that watched what happened through a one-way window. “It was clear that not everyone understood the concept,” she told me.Those who did had questions — a lot of them. “It was: ‘What if this happens? What if that happens? What if I’m a guest, and my host makes me dinner, and I don’t want to finish it?’ ” Kenny recalled one morning as we sat in a cafe in Shibuya, not far from Love Hotel Hill. “Here they are, they haven’t booked a trip. They haven’t traveled. They’re just looking at a website, and already they’re going through the what-ifs.” One participant asked what would happen if he rented a place online and then, when he got there, it turned out to be a supermarket. Someone else studied a photo of a Western host posed casually with a coconut-water drink on her lap and, seeming flummoxed, asked, “How would I even address her?” It was, you might say, a full-on display of uncertainty-avoidance, though perhaps not surprising in a country that’s routinely walloped by volcanic eruptions, earthquakes and typhoons and was, at the time, just a few years past a horrifying tsunami and the Fukushima nuclear meltdown. Still, it didn’t necessarily bode well for business.There was one woman, however, who grasped the idea immediately. “She was like: ‘I can stay in a castle? You put castles on this site? That’s amazing,’ ” Kenny said. She pulled out her laptop and showed me a photo taken at the focus group. A half-dozen young women sat around a conference-room table; five of them were dressed in gray or black. The sixth wore an electric orange sweater. She, of course, was the castle-lover, an instant icon for Kenny and her colleagues. “There was something so distinct in her mannerisms,” Kenny said. “Even from behind the window, you could see she was genuinely excited about it. It was like: What is it about this woman in the bright orange sweater that makes her more interested in the idea of Airbnb, even as all her peers are focused on the worst-case scenarios?”The woman in the orange sweater matters as an ideal, not just to Airbnb but to any company breaking into a new market, especially a market that may be inherently resistant to what’s being sold. She’s an early adopter in chrysalis form — curious, unconcerned with convention, seemingly willing to gamble on something unproved, ready to buy. Or sell. When I jokingly asked Kenny if they’d tried to recruit the woman as an Airbnb host in Tokyo, she laughed and said no, adding, “But we probably should have.”On the surface, the superhosts Kenny and Lee interviewed over the course of several days had little in common with one another — a husband and wife expecting their first child, a cool guy who liked to take his guests clubbing, a well-off gay couple who’d bought a second apartment as an investment — but they were all Orange Sweaters in a way. All spoke at least a little bit of English. More important, it seemed, everyone had some defining experience with outsiders. Two of the couples were multinational — Japanese natives with partners who were American and Chinese. Other hosts were Japanese by birth but had lived in other countries or traveled a lot. This appeared to give them a certain renegade perspective, a degree of global cross-pollination and comfort with strangers that seemed to put them at odds with many of the people around them, but also made them more like other Airbnb users internationally.A number of the Tokyo hosts said they deliberately kept quiet about their involvement with Airbnb. “It’s kind of like talking about your investment portfolio,” one said. “You really only discuss it with the very closest of friends.” Japan has a national hotel law, which requires the licensing of any business that provides accommodation, though enforcement is spotty. But there’s also a tradition of individuals’ renting rooms to students or short-term visitors, called minpaku, which is considered legal. Airbnb, as it does in many countries, exists — nimbly, cannily — in a gray area. Mostly, people feared their neighbors, concerned that one poor interaction with a foreigner — one noisy night, one trampled flower bed, one failure to interpret the boundaries of what was acceptable — might lead to a police complaint or problems with a landlord.I was starting to see why foreigners in Japan were so worrying, so problematic. Accompanied by a translator who knew the city, Kenny, Lee and I moved around Tokyo with relative ease, but the second she clocked out for the day, we were shucked instantly of our grace. We walked down the wrong streets, ordered things we didn’t intend to at restaurants, were bumbling when counting our yen at cash registers. Kenny had taken to bowing at everyone she saw. When spoken to in Japanese, Lee and I automatically, like dummies, responded in Spanish. We swam constantly in uncertainty. We wandered the basement food court of a fancy department store in Ginza, looking at sugary pastries that were shaped like fish and raw fish that had been cut to look like candy. We stood dumbfounded in front of a cantaloupe that cost $127. I felt as alien as I’d ever felt in my life.One morning, we visited a 27-year-old tech blogger named Ryoma Machida, who lives with his wife in a small house in a densely populated neighborhood and rents out a room on Airbnb. He also manages 11 other Airbnb properties. Machida has a mop of hair and a thoughtful demeanor. He studied international business at a university in New Zealand and first learned about Airbnb by reading Mashable. He had a picture of Steve Jobs taped to his refrigerator.Machida was trying to start a business called Zens that would help more Japanese people host on Airbnb, taking care of bookings and guest communication and even designing custom-made furniture for compact spaces that could store bulky luggage. He was thinking ambitiously. He saw the 2020 Olympics as an opportunity not just for himself but for Japan. Sitting with his dog on his lap, he spoke about the fact that Japan’s population was aging and its economy faltering. “We have 8.3 million empty homes in this country,” he said, “We have smaller families, less money.” He went on to describe how he’d like to start working with communities in the Japanese countryside to encourage them to open their homes to foreigners, who would then come spend money and slowly start to revitalize the economy. “Airbnb,” he said, “could be a Japan-saver.”It was a difficult path to forge, however, not just because Airbnb was relatively unknown in Japan, but also because the start-up mentality did not seem to play well in general there. According to the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, which collects data on business growth, Japan has among the lowest levels of start-up activity in the world, with roughly 3.7 percent of the adult population engaged in entrepreneurship — as compared with about 13 percent in the United States. Machida, though, struck me as a change-maker, an individualist who was nonetheless sensitive to his own culture’s collectivist norms. He chalked up the resistance to outsiders largely to a simple lack of exposure. A number of his friends, he said, had never spoken to a foreigner in their lives. He was working to remedy this by organizing informal get-togethers between Airbnb visitors and Japanese friends a couple of times a month, spreading the word via Facebook. With neighbors who weren’t sure what to make of his foreign guests, he tried to humanize them: “I say: ‘Today we have guests from France. They are 35 years old, and they are teachers.’ ”At the same time, he also worked to educate Airbnb guests on the Japanese way of doing things. When new guests checked into a place he managed, he met them personally, showing them how to remove their shoes at the door and explaining that they needed to speak more quietly than maybe they did at home. Sometimes, though, the gulf between cultures felt unbridgeable, the boundaries impossible to translate. Machida described running afoul of a building co-op board, forced to close one of his listings after a visitor from Europe was spotted, to someone’s apparent horror, charging her cellphone in the building’s lobby.Later, as Kenny, Lee and Suda were debriefing at a cafe, I voiced my enthusiasm about Machida. Wasn’t he exactly the sort of person the company was looking for? A gung-ho ambassador, an innovator, an optimist? The Airbnb researchers nodded yes, but Suda, the translator, emphatically shook her head no, declaring that Machida would never make it as a Tokyo businessman. He was too brazen, she suggested, too casual in the way he spoke about making change and making money. “You’re not supposed to get rich fast,” she said. “That’s just Japan.”One night, on my way back up Love Hotel Hill, I decided to stop into Pub Slow Jam for a beer. It was a Monday and the eve of some sort of holiday in Japan. People were setting off firecrackers in the streets; spiky-haired teenage boys wandered around in leather jackets, girls tottered on high heels, everyone shouting into the night and snapping photos with their cellphones. Music blared from the trinket shops. The pachinko parlors had their doors open, plinking and pulsing with light. I thought that maybe Pub Slow Jam would be lively, that I might find some people to chat with in English there. But when I entered, it was a forlorn, low-ceilinged establishment with a few stools, a formica bar and K-Pop playing in the background. A lone couple sat at the far end of the bar quietly sipping drinks, possibly gearing up for a Love Hotel experience. When I glanced at them, they looked away. The bartender greeted me in Japanese, and I said hello back — I had mastered that much — but otherwise there was nothing more either of us could say. I drank my beer in solitude, paid the bill and went home, back to my miniature room.Ultimate Tokyo-Sized Experience!! felt less strange than it once did. I sat on my futon, as I had every night, reading the day’s news on my laptop, the world’s uncertainties writ large: Ebola was raging. There were hostages in Syria. The Nigerian schoolgirls were still missing. And off the coast of Japan, a typhoon swirled ominously in the Pacific.Around me, the building was silent — weirdly silent for its location in Shibuya, for the riotous partying going on in the streets that night. If Airbnb was going to grow in Japan, it occurred to me that it might sprout faster in places like this — in cheap impersonal residences in the city center as opposed to in the close-knit residential neighborhoods we’d been visiting. My room was next to the elevator on the third floor, which when I first arrived concerned me, until I realized it was either a very quiet elevator or else there was nobody using it. Immediately next to my door was an identical door, and right next to that door was another. The building was open in the center, so you could look up and down and see the other floors. There were maybe seven floors in the building, maybe 12 doors on every floor. I got the feeling that behind each one was a place as simple and compact as mine, like cabins on a cruise ship.The laminated instructions left by the faceless Airbnb host/management company included strong admonishments to keep quiet and not talk to anybody else I might encounter. My checkout instructions included taking my printed map and itinerary with me when I left. “Why?” the instructions read. “Because we really don’t like people we don’t know finding directions to our apartment in the trash.”But the odd thing was I never saw anyone coming or going from the building, anyway — not once in four days, not another soul. Was anyone even there? I hoped so. It would be too lonely, otherwise. I could assume only that the building was populated with people who, like me, were for some reason nervous and dislocated, and therefore quiet — unsure whether they belonged. Maybe the place was full of migrant workers or runaways who’d turned to prostitution. Or could it be that behind each door was a traveler who’d rented an apartment that had looked tidy and appealing on the Airbnb website and was now just politely trying to stay hidden? I didn’t know; I’d never know. In the half-conscious fog of my jet lag, the building felt to me like a giant ghost ship moving through the night, and I imagined us — whoever we were — on a dark ocean, drifting away from whatever land we understood.