https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/15/world/middleeast/syria-ceasefire.html
‘All Syrians Are Tired of This Absurd War’: Voices From the Cease-Fire - The New York Times
Syria,Terrorism,Defense and Military Forces,Russia,United States International Relations
Sept. 14, 2016
5473
BEIRUT, Lebanon — In rebel-held areas of Syria, Day 2 of a shaky cease-fire offered a rare chance to go outside. For some, that meant enjoying the simple pleasure of playing on a swing. For others, it meant protesting.But no matter, it was a change from the routine of lives in a war zone, where days were often spent cowering in fear of airstrikes.The cease-fire negotiated between Russia and the United States was supposed to allow for delivery of aid to the divided city of Aleppo. Everything is needed: food, medicine, blankets. But United Nations officials said they had not received a guarantee of safe passage, and truckloads of goods remained at the border with Turkey.Diplomacy is driven by those in power — who live and work safely outside the war-torn country. But it is the people of Syria who have the most at stake, and so we wanted to hear from them. For many, the pause in the fighting was a chance to experience the routines of life that many take for granted: Taking a photograph of a friend, shopping for food.“I think both sides, the opposition and regime, are tired of this war and want to have a break,” said Abu Yaman, a father of four in Damascus.Read more accounts below, and see more about the terms of the deal here.Abu Yaman lives in Masakin Barzeh, in government-held Damascus, Syria’s capital. He spoke to a New York Times reporter who is identifying him only by a nickname for his safety.Modar Shekho, 28, a nurse at al-Dakkak hospital in the rebel-held eastern section of Aleppo, took part in a protest Tuesday night against the planned U.N. aid convoy. Syrians there said that any aid delivery that required permission from the government would legitimize the siege. They called instead for free movement of goods and people — but Russia and the Syrian government say that is a security risk.Mr. Shekho filmed the protest with his smartphone, showing a few dozen people, some carrying signs with a dark red X over the letters “U.N.” and flags of the Free Syrian Army and the rebranded Nusra Front.Hala Abdulwahab, 24, a teacher in the besieged town of Madaya near the Lebanese border, spent the holiday taking advantage of the cease-fire to tour the town.Muhammed Najdat Kaddour, 31, a citizen journalist from the rebel-held province of Idlib, took a rare day off from documenting the war, and spoke via internet chat.