http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/17/world/asia/philippine-rebels-hand-over-weapons-as-part-of-tentative-peace-deal.html
Philippine Rebels Give Up Dozens of Weapons in Step Toward Peace Deal - The New York Times
Philippines,Moro Islamic Liberation Front,Arms Control and Limitation and Disarmament,Mindanao (Philippines),Aquino  Benigno S III
June 16, 2015
2614
MANILA — Islamic militants in the southern Philippines turned over dozens of weapons on Tuesday as part of a tentative peace deal, an agreement that is facing stiff resistance from lawmakers since a firefight with rebels in January that killed dozens of police officers.The largely symbolic handover on Tuesday involved the decommissioning of 75 weapons and the registration of 145 members of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the country’s largest rebel group, who have agreed to enter civilian life. The organization has more than 10,000 fighters and an extensive arsenal of heavy weaponry.Complete disarmament is not scheduled to take place until Congress passes legislation finalizing the peace deal, which was signed in 2012. But officials said on Tuesday that the initial handover was an important gesture, particularly in light of the fact that the rebels use their weapons to defend themselves against other armed groups in the often-violent south.“Our brothers are voluntarily laying down their arms,” President Benigno S. Aquino III said at the ceremony. “They are fully aware of the threats to their own safety brought about by private armed groups, but they are doing this nonetheless; they are telling us: ‘Brother, this weapon that I used to defend myself, I no longer need it. I wholeheartedly entrust my safety to you.’ ”The peace deal with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front would establish an autonomous region in Muslim-dominated areas of the southern Philippines and provide generous tax and financial provisions in return for the rebels laying down their arms. Decades of conflict between the government and militants in the south have killed thousands of people and displaced more than three million.The agreement was put in jeopardy in January, when hundreds of Philippine National Police officers descended on the small town of Mamasapano in a rebel-held area of the southern Philippines in search of international terrorism suspects. A firefight ensued that killed 44 officers and dozens of rebels and ignited a firestorm of negative sentiment toward the peace deal.“The Mamasapano incident changed the equation,” said Celso L. Lobregat Jr., a lawmaker who serves on a committee examining the legislation underpinning the peace agreement, called the Bangsamoro law. “Before the incident, the attitude in most of the country was: We’re not under the Bangsamoro, so why not give peace a chance? But now, people are questioning the law.”Surveys taken in March by the country’s two largest polling groups, Pulse Asia and Social Weather Stations, found that about 45 percent of those surveyed opposed the deal and roughly half that number approved. People who said they opposed it cited a lack of trust in the rebels to uphold their end of the agreement.To be carried out, the peace deal must be passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives, signed by the president and approved in a plebiscite held in the areas that would fall under the new autonomous region. Mr. Aquino has said that he hopes to have the deal completed by the time he leaves office in 2016.Lawmakers in both houses have expressed strong reservations about the terms of the agreement. Several senators have pointed out in nationally televised debates that the new autonomous region appears to establish a sovereign substate in the southern Philippines with its own police, courts and separate system of government.Both houses of Congress have drafted alternative versions of the agreement that would put the new autonomous region more firmly under the control and oversight of national government agencies. Some lawmakers have called for the deal to be scrapped and a new one negotiated with rebels after Mr. Aquino leaves office.“The law cannot be passed as proposed by the administration,” Mr. Lobregat said by telephone. Referring to the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, he added, “The MILF thought that the president could bind all three branches of government to his agreement, but we know that is impossible. The MILF needs to be made to understand that whoever gave them that understanding gave them false hope.”Al Haj Murad Ebrahim, the head of the rebel group, said on Tuesday that he would not accept a modified deal that did not conform to the “letter and the spirit” of the original agreement. In previous statements, he has not specified what would be considered an unacceptable change to the deal. He has said that his group would examine the final version passed by Congress before taking a position.Mohagher Iqbal, the chief negotiator for the rebels, warned in a recent interview that the deal should not be postponed until the next presidential administration.“Opportunity knocks only once,” Mr. Iqbal said. “If we cannot have the Bangsamoro law passed by Congress now, I don’t know what year, what administration, when this kind of opportunity will come again.”One analyst said it was unlikely that the circumstances under the next presidential administration would be as conducive to an agreement.“It would be a pity if the Bangsamoro basic law is not passed, because we are so close,” said Christian Monsod, a lawyer who served on the panel that wrote the Philippine Constitution. “For the first time, leaders on both sides trust each other, and that’s so important in the peace process.”