http://www.nytimes.com/2001/04/16/us/mayor-scales-back-curfew-after-calm-night-in-cincinnati.html
Mayor Scales Back Curfew After Calm Night in Cincinnati - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,CINCINNATI (OHIO),SHARPTON  AL,BUSH  GEORGE W,THOMAS  TIMOTHY,LUKEN  CHARLIE,ROACH  STEVEN,POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT,BLACKS,CURFEWS,DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS,POLICE
April 16, 2001
7326
The mayor rolled back the city's dusk-to-dawn curfew today in response to a calm night after the funeral of a black teenager whose shooting by a white police officer triggered a week of unrest.The mayor, Charlie Luken, said the curfew would start at 11 p.m. instead of 8 p.m. to allow families more time to celebrate Easter together.The death on April 7 of Timothy Thomas, 19, led to three days of violence in predominantly black neighborhoods that stopped when the mayor instituted the curfew on Thursday.Mr. Thomas, who was wanted on 14 warrants involving misdemeanors and traffic violations, was unarmed when he was shot while running from the police. He is the fourth black man killed by the police since November in this city of 331,000.Officer Steven Roach, who shot Mr. Thomas, is on paid administrative leave.Overnight Saturday, the police arrested 187 people for curfew violations and received calls about shots being fired and sporadic instances of rocks and bottles being thrown at police cruisers.''It was almost a boring night for us,'' Thomas Streicher, the police chief, said.Since Mr. Thomas's death, more than 700 people have been arrested on charges of looting,  arson, vandalism and curfew violations.The Rev. Al Sharpton, who cut short a trip to Africa to fly to Cincinnati, said today that the federal government must take a leadership role in improving relationships between city police departments and blacks and that President Bush must get involved.''He has a crisis in his country,'' said Mr. Sharpton, a critic of the New York City Police Department for violent confrontations with blacks. ''It's time for a national response and real change, not just telling us to quiet  down.''On Saturday, hundreds of protesters marched through the unrest-scarred Over-the-Rhine neighborhood after the funeral.Four people were injured by crowd-control beanbags shot by police and Ohio Highway Patrol officers, but the march was otherwise peaceful. The police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation were investigating why officers also shot beanbags at a group milling on streets shortly after the funeral.''We don't feel completely like this is over,'' Mr. Luken said. ''We recognize that in certain parts of the city tensions still are a little high.''