https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/13/books/review/critics-take-queer-writing.html
The Modern Trans Memoir Comes of Age - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Jenner  Caitlyn (1949- ),Mock  Janet
June 13, 2017
3992
If all life is revision, then what do the memoirs of transgender people tell us about the process of creating the best draft of the self? Two new books — Caitlyn Jenner’s “The Secrets of My Life” (written with Buzz Bissinger) and Janet Mock’s “Surpassing Certainty” — provide some answers.Trans people have always been part of humanity, but it’s only in the last century that we’ve begun to tell our own stories. In this country, you can find a record of our existence as far back as the portrait of Viscount Cornbury, a colonial governor of New York and New Jersey. A painting hanging in the New-York Historical Society shows the governor in a lovely formal gown and tiara, holding an ornamental fan. He said he represented Queen Anne in America and that “in all respects I ought to represent her as faithfully as I can.”The modern trans memoir came into being with Christine Jorgensen’s “A Personal Autobiography,” published in 1967. Jorgensen’s transition was covered with all the subtlety of a Martian invasion; “Ex-G.I. Becomes Blonde Bombshell” ran a typical tabloid headline. To read the book now is to see how dearly Jorgensen wished to be understood, even as she seemed aware of how resistant some of her readers might be.It’s a common theme in trans memoirs, the hope of being known. It runs through other early canonical works, such as “Conundrum” (1974), by the legendary travel writer Jan Morris, and “Second Serve” (1983), by the tennis great Renée Richards. The authors seem to be on the defense at times and write as if the question of their humanity were part of an argument they might win or lose. They’re not much concerned with gender theory; Morris once said, “When I hear the word ‘gender,’ I reach for my pistol.” Instead, they dwell on transition and its many permutations: medical, social and hormonal.It was Kate Bornstein’s “Gender Outlaw,” originally published in 1994 and revised last year, that radically reconfigured the genre. Bornstein — actor, provocateur, gleeful troublemaker — playfully mixed memoir and gender theory, and popularized the idea that gender isn’t a binary. Many people find their best, true selves somewhere between the extremes of male and female, she wrote (the subtitle to her book is “On Men, Women, and the Rest of Us”). In her revision, Bornstein wished to correct her thesis that we must do away with gender entirely. “If I used to say binary = bad, and nonbinary = good, I’ve since come to believe that in fact, both binary and nonbinary, as ways of being, are good,” she told me. “Whatever people need to do to find their happiness, as long as they’re not mean, is fine with me.”Bornstein paved the way for books like Jamison Green’s “Becoming a Visible Man” (2004), the first great memoir by a trans man. Green takes an explicitly intersectional angle and echoes some of the gender theory that made “Gender Outlaw” so unnerving — and so entertaining.Where do the books by Mock and Jenner (both of whom I know) fall in this tradition? “Surpassing Certainty” is partly in the mode of “Gender Outlaw,” and positions its story within a larger history of a struggle for human rights. But Mock’s book is also a work of the heart, much of it focusing on the dissolution of her first marriage, and her journey from a Honolulu strip club to an editor at People magazine.Jenner, who didn’t come out until after she was eligible for Social Security, has a very different story to tell. Much of her book is about the millstone of celebrity; it’s more Chaz Bono (“Transition,” 2011) than Kate Bornstein. In my own memoir, “She’s Not There,” I wrote that the biggest change in life was not going from male to female but going from a person with secrets to a person without them, and Jenner shares this plaint. But she’s found peace at last: “The more we celebrate our difference, the more we will be celebrated,” she writes. “There are too many of us out there anyway just waiting to bloom.”I like to tell people, “If you’ve met one trans person, you’ve met … one trans person”; the diversity of experience within our community is what I find most important. Unlike the writers who’ve come before, Mock and Jenner are freed from the burden of pioneering the genre. And it isn’t their trans identities that make their stories worth reading. It’s their courage and grace — qualities that are, of course, neither male nor female, but human.Maybe the memoirs in this blossoming genre teach us that trans experience is a more vivid version of something universal. After all, is there anyone who hasn’t carried something secret in her heart and wondered if she could summon the courage to bring it into the light? Or wondered if she could draft a better, truer version of herself? Could there ever be anything more human than the desire to be known?Stories of transgender people, as harrowing as they can be, remind us that with cunning, imagination and luck, we are sometimes able, against all odds, to create — and revise — our own souls. I wonder what Lord Cornbury would think now about the territory he once called home.