http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/06/us/has-opioid-abuse-affected-you-readers-respond.html
Has Opioid Abuse Affected You? Readers Respond - The New York Times
Heroin,Naloxone (Drug),OxyContin (Drug),Addiction (Psychology),Pain-Relieving Drugs,Therapy and Rehabilitation,Drug Abuse and Traffic,Drugs (Pharmaceuticals)
Jan. 6, 2017
9595
The devastating effects of opioid abuse are rippling through families and neighborhoods across the United States.We asked to hear readers’ stories about painkillers, heroin and addiction, and how the opioid epidemic is playing out where they live. Hundreds of people responded. Here are some of the responses, in readers’ own words, lightly edited for clarity.When I was introduced to OxyContin, I felt that I had found my relief. I had finally found something to calm my brain down. I had no idea that if I stopped using these pills, I would be left with more anxiety than I had ever felt. I am 26 years old with 2.5 years clean. — Sadie Campbell, 26, Portland, Ore.Graduated magna cum laude from law school. After motor vehicle accident, I was prescribed hydrocodone and eventually ended up on OxyContin, Percocet, Xanax, Soma. Eventually I couldn’t manage the pain because it was worse, and went on disability. Lost my wife, friends and job. — Sean, 43, CaliforniaI remember the moments of shame and guilt after being resuscitated from an overdose. It didn’t start like that, but no one told me it would end like that. I did it to get high until I had to do it to be “normal,” to function, to not be in excruciating pain. Now I’ve been sober for two and a half years. — Zach Neuser, Midland, Tex.I am a 45-year-old married mother of two. After multiple medical procedures, I found myself with a full-blown opiate addiction. I sought treatment at an inpatient recovery center, was counseled to not move back home but rather transitional housing. It was then I was introduced to heroin. I was told just use a little, that’s all it takes. It will help you get by. You only need to do it once a day. LIES LIES LIES!!! — Laura Dingee, White Lake, Mich.I have used pain medication for 35 years without a problem. The issue on the prescription-drug side of the issue is stupidity. Take addictive drugs too long and guess what? On the other side, what is important to understand is that people who feel very poorly about themselves and their prospects are very inclined to indulge in something that makes it all go away. — Ben Jencks, Springfield, Ore.I paid $50 every month to see a pain specialist who said “How are you, here’s your prescription” without any consideration for the amplified pain. I believed the doctors would know better than I would, so I never addressed it. — Stephanie Scheffner, 36, Boise, IdahoMy 30-year-old son is a recovering addict/alcoholic. From middle school on, he moved through pot, alcohol and opiates. One time I thought he was dead. There were so many lies and denials. His addiction forced me to seek my own recovery and has made me a better parent and person. It took a lot for him to get sober at age 24. He is my hero. — Jan, 60, South Pasadena, Calif.My son accepted that he could no longer endure his life of addiction, but only after a night camping out under a highway overpass with homeless heroin users. He used a needle for the first time. — Lucy, San FranciscoI broke my back in 2012. I used anything and everything to cope with the pain. Once the doctors figured out I was abusing the pain pills, they cut me off. I thought I was going to die. I was introduced to mainstream heroin. I was in love with it the first time I tried it. I craved and sought it through every step of my days. Sober since 4/28/15. — Braden Ewell, Odessa, Tex.This is a stigmatization of a useful and necessary prescription drug that is used responsibly by almost everyone for whom it is prescribed. If the so-called War on Drugs has taught us a single thing (the same that Prohibition taught us), it’s that some people will do anything to get high, including dying. — Dan Lundmark, Fort Collins, Colo.My son has been addicted to opiates for 11 years now, first OxyContin, then heroin. Every time he lied to me about getting clean, I would believe him and try to help him out. Now I just hope his bottom is not his death. This is something no parent can be at peace with. My son is dead but not dead. — Ross, TucsonI became addicted to prescription painkillers due to an automobile accident. It took me eight years to get my life back on track. I lost guardianship of my older two children and in the midst of all of it ended up in jail, then pregnant; my daughter was born and went through withdrawal because it had such a hold on me. I went to detox and rehab, got my life together for a few months, all to be in another devastating car accident and right back on painkillers due to all the injuries. Now struggling again. — Meagan, Cadillac, Mich.My husband and I have had an assortment of dental and day-surgery procedures (typical for our age) that usually include a prescription for far more painkillers than we need. We don’t understand why patient post-procedure instructions do not include info about safe ways to dispose of these drugs. — Nancy A. Johnson, Edina, Minn.I started taking painkillers when I was 19. I went to the dentist one day for a toothache and was prescribed Vicodin. After that first one, I was hooked. Then one day a friend introduced me to heroin. I started stealing from my family, and they pressed charges on me. I thank God every day because I’m alive today. — Carla Goff, Shelby, OhioMy father’s life spiraled out of control, and he became addicted to prescription painkillers. After hitting rock bottom and finding himself deeply in debt, my father went through an in-treatment program. About two months after successfully completing the program, he died unexpectedly. Now I am left with the uncertainty surrounding my father’s death. — Megan Lennon, 34, MinneapolisSeven rehabs, suboxone, doctors, methadone clinics, money, money, money that you do not have but you would sell your soul to get. Begging God to get through to him as I age early. Why? — Karen, 54, Yardley, Pa.My home was broken into and I have been scammed and had my wallet stolen by addicts. I understand how difficult addiction is, but what I don’t understand is why someone chooses to put poison in their body for the first time. If it really wanted to, the federal government could stem the flood of drugs into this country. — Ann, 58, PennsylvaniaI have been battling addiction for 16 years. When I found heroin, I thought I had found heaven. I have now learned to not only lay the dope down but to give reality a chance. It’s not my parents, friends, husband’s or even God’s fault I used, and it not anyone’s fault today when things go bad. It’s solely mine. — Cacey Ethington, 30, Shelbyville, Ky.The reporting is one-sided and leaves out how all of these new laws affect chronic-pain patients. We do not abuse these drugs. We need them to function in daily life. Politicians should not make health care decisions. — Christiane Warren, Kearny, N.J.It wasn’t until I got involved in Harm Reduction that my brother’s heroin addiction made sense to me. I remember the first time I brought home clean needles and naloxone, and the guilt I felt. I talked to a friend about it. She smiled and said, “You know, I look at it like this: Wearing a seatbelt won’t stop a car accident from happening, but it will drastically increase your odds of surviving one.” — Emily, BuffaloMy life was altered due to heroin ever since I was a baby. My mother was a chronic heroin user while my father was in jail for small crimes and different drug offenses. My grandparents went to court to gain custody of my twin sister and me. I always wonder what life would have been like if opioids didn’t take over my mother’s life. — David, Millersville, Pa.My 19-year-old son, Creighton Shipman, overdosed from heroin less than 48 hours after leaving rehab. His eight-month ride with heroin began after he was prescribed an opioid from an emergency surgery. My three children and I have been doing our best to educate and make our community aware of the crisis. I had no idea that this was here, in Charleston. — Nanci Steadman Shipman, Charleston, S.C.