https://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/26/sunday-review/the-failing-state-of-greece.html
The Failing State of Greece - The New York Times
Greece,Europe,European Sovereign Debt Crisis (2010- ),European Central Bank,Banking and Financial Institutions,European Union,Economic Conditions and Trends,European Commission,European Monetary Union,International Monetary Fund
Feb. 25, 2012
4727
AthensTHE first time I visited Athens, the city was in flames. It was December 2008, and riots, set off after a policeman’s bullet killed a teenager, engulfed the city. For several terrifying days, the rule of law was tenuous at best.On my second trip, for the national elections in October 2009 when the Socialists won, I went to the movies one night. As I sat in the elegant, neo-Classical-style theater, an usher checked to make sure I was in the correct assigned spot. The jarring contrast made me laugh. In that cinema, at least, the rules were rules.Last week, I stood outside that theater — the Attikon, it was called — and reeled at the sight of its burned-out shell. It had been gutted by fire on Feb. 12, a wild night when marauding bands of arsonists with Molotov cocktails targeted shops and buildings, most of them historic, while just blocks away the Greek Parliament approved the latest package of austerity measures demanded by Greece’s troika of foreign lenders. The troika — the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund — won’t give 130 billion euros in new loans without pain. The Greeks won’t accept the pain without anger.As more than 6,000 policemen stood guard, these roving bands — several dozen criminals, by official estimates — infiltrated a vast, largely peaceful demonstration of more than 80,000 people and pushed the city into mayhem. Once again, Athens burned. Once again, the rule of law had foundered. But how badly? And how long before it would again?What are we to make of Greece, which borrowed beyond its means and now has been pushed to the brink by its lenders? Is it the “problem child” of Europe, more corrupt and dysfunctional than its neighbors? Is it a special case, as the lenders are saying, hoping that after the write-down of Greek debt last week they won’t have to restructure other ailing euro zone countries’ large public debts? Or is it in fact a harbinger, a vision of how economic collapse transforms a country — or of what happens to democracy when banks become more powerful than political institutions?While the mainstream political parties suffer under the weight of their own mismanagement and of the austerity they have pledged and reforms they have often struggled to enforce, unemployment and homelessness rise and the European Union inches toward transforming its institutions to get behind a currency battered by fast-moving market forces. Something profound and distressing is happening: the rapid dissolution of a democracy in plain sight. As I stood outside the Attikon last week, I asked myself: Where is the line between a weak state and a failed state?I posed the question to Thanos Veremis, a reform-minded historian and a supporter of Prime Minister Lucas Papademos, the former European Central Bank official who is now attempting to govern Greece ahead of elections expected this spring. “Greece is a strong failed state,” he answered almost cheerily. I looked around the room. We were drinking Earl Grey tea in the elegant Grande Bretagne Hotel in Syntagma Square. Across the tiled mosaic floor, the other tables were filled with politicians, former politicians, one long-bearded priest in black robes and several smartly dressed men doing business over their laptops. If this was a failed state, it functioned remarkably well.IN many ways, the future of the Greek state is marked out in the fine print of the 400-plus-page loan agreement that the Greek Parliament signed earlier this month. Amid the wage cuts, tax hikes and closures of government agencies, it stipulates a permanent troika presence, which will have power of oversight if not actual executive powers. The conventional wisdom among the reform-minded here is that foreign intervention is the only way to repair the Greek state. Others say this is the first step to Greece’s becoming a de facto colony — a kind of German one — within the union. Either way, it is a development with far-reaching implications for democratic Europe.Greece’s political class may have defaulted, its legitimacy eroded by decades of a jobs-for-votes system. But Greece today looks less like a Western European democracy and more like a company in the midst of restructuring, with outside financiers and lawyers advising it on delicate affairs of state. Some say this is inevitable for a country with such high debt. But where will this lead? To whom do the advisers — and the troika — answer? Who minds the minders?A painful anxiety hangs over Greece today, a fatigue that comes from living amid constant crisis with no catharsis; from not knowing where your country is headed; from not knowing who, if anyone, is in charge, in Greece or in Europe; from not really understanding what happened. Earlier this month, I spoke with a friend in Athens. “My mother finally did it,” he told me. “She had been thinking about it for a long time, but today she did it. She took all her savings out of the bank.” My friend’s mother, a public servant, had been a holdout among her friends. The new debt deal was intended to remove this uncertainty, to encourage Greeks to put their money back into the banks. But it has so far brought little relief.Recently, the news here was filled with images of a young couple threatening to jump from a building. They were both employed by a state agency that provides housing for workers. They feared for their future, and that of their ailing child, once the agency closed under the austerity measures. The drama seemed to capture the air of desperation here, as workers fight for what they consider to be rights — the cornerstone of the European social welfare state — and Greece’s lenders increasingly see as revocable privileges, no longer sustainable. The battle for the future of Europe is being fought over that line.One day last fall, I spoke with Andreas Deliyannis, a man in his mid-50s who had lost his job at a car-parts distributor. “You’re disillusioned. Not for yourself, not for your country, but for how the whole world is going,” he said, as we sat in a cafe in the upper-middle-class suburb of Athens where he lived. “It’s kind of like a war without guns. In war, you can see what you’re up against. Here, it’s an invisible enemy.”Greece today feels very much like the front lines of something — the dissolution of an economic order, the transformation or undoing of the ideals behind the European Union. After World War II, the countries of Western Europe bound themselves together through treaties in the hope that economic interdependence would lessen the threat of war. But economics is not enough, it seems. In “A Grand Illusion?” — a prescient 1996 essay on the European Union — Tony Judt called the belief “that social and political institutions and affinities naturally and necessarily follow economic ones” a “reductivist fallacy.”The affinities, such as they are, are no longer obvious. Debt-ridden Greece and export-driven Germany are trapped in a bad marriage, but for now, at least, are sticking it out for the sake of the European Union. “Either you stay together and you all make sacrifices to stay together, or you decide on a divorce, which can be very, very messy and can take decades and can unravel other marriages,” George Papaconstantinou, the current environment minister and a former finance minister, recently told me.Greeks do not feel they are unique. There is sometimes even a dark glee in the prospect of sharing their plight. “We are a ticking time bomb,” a clerk, Elias Darlas, told me last week as he sold traditional Greek worry beads in downtown Athens. “Like the Arab Spring, if it exploded here, it will happen elsewhere.”