http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/23/world/asia/south-korea-announces-talks-with-north-to-defuse-border-tensions.html
South and North Korea Hold Talks to Defuse Border Tensions - The New York Times
South Korea,North Korea,Mines  Explosive,Panmunjom (South Korea),Kim Jong-un,Park Geun-hye
Aug. 22, 2015
5266
SEOUL, South Korea —  South and North Korea held a high-level meeting on their border on Saturday and agreed to meet again on Sunday, South Korean officials said, apparently easing, at least temporarily, a tense standoff that has prevailed since the countries exchanged artillery fire two days ago.The meeting, which began in the border village of Panmunjom on Saturday evening, continued until early Sunday morning, said Min Kyung-wook, spokesman for President Park Geun-hye of South Korea. Mr. Min said it included top policy makers from both sides: Kim Kwan-jin, Ms. Park’s senior national security adviser, and Vice Marshal Hwang Pyong-so, North Korea’s most powerful military officer after Kim Jong-un, the supreme leader, who holds the rank of marshal.“Both sides had comprehensive discussions on how to resolve the current situation and how to improve South-North relations in general,” Mr. Min said. The negotiators agreed to meet again on Sunday afternoon to try to narrow their differences, he said.North Korea’s state-run news media, reporting on the talks, did something it had not done for several years, raising hopes for the border meeting: It referred to South Korea by its official name, the Republic of Korea, instead of using the North’s standard derogatory reference to “South Korean puppets.”The agreement to hold the border talks on Saturday came just hours before a 5 p.m. deadline that the North had given the South to stop broadcasting propaganda messages from loudspeakers placed along the heavily militarized border; the talks began shortly after the deadline. The North had threatened “strong military action” unless the broadcasts stopped.South Korean officials said that Unification Minister Hong Yong-pyo of South Korea and Kim Yang-gon, a senior North Korean Workers’ Party secretary in charge of relations with the South, had also taken part in the meeting.On Thursday, the two Koreas exchanged fire across their border. No casualties were reported, but it was their most serious clash in five years.South Korean officials said they believed that the North had begun firing as a warning to stop the loudspeaker broadcasts. The South had resumed the broadcasts, a propaganda tactic dating from the Cold War, this month after 11 years, in response to the maiming of two South Korean border guards by land mines that the South accused the North of planting.Kim Kyou-hyun, a senior presidential aide, said that discussions about meeting at Panmunjom had begun Friday, when Kim Yang-gon, the North Korean official, suggested it in a message to the South.It was the first high-level dialogue between the Koreas since February 2014, apart from an informal meeting in October after Vice Marshal Hwang and other North Korean officials made a surprise decision to attend the Asian Games in the South.The South has said it will not stop the propaganda broadcasts unless the North apologizes for planting the land mines and punishes those responsible. North Korea has denied planting the mines; it has also denied starting the exchange of fire on Thursday, accusing the South of fabricating both episodes.