https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/22/automobiles/autoreviews/video-review-toyota-prius-prime-hybrid.html
Video Review: Doing the Math on Toyota’s Prius Prime Hybrid - The New York Times
Consumer Reviews,Toyota Motor Corp,Electric and Hybrid Vehicles
June 22, 2017
5609
As otherworldly as the Prius Prime looks, it’s not the offspring of the Transformers leader Optimus. It’s Toyota’s plug-in hybrid variant.The concept is simple: Charge the battery and it drives like an electric car. Once the battery is spent, the Prime drives like any other Prius. Easy peasy.It’s not Toyota’s first plug-in. My neighbor has the first one, based on the third-generation Prius, and she has been disappointed with its real-world all-electric range of 11 miles. Prime, riding on Toyota’s new scalable chassis architecture, rectifies that. Toyota claims up to 25 miles in E.V. mode. I saw 24, restraining my inner Mario Andretti.Math class is in session. Don’t groan: Numbers are important to plug-ins. Prime’s main competitor, the Chevrolet Volt, is rated by the Environmental Protection Agency at 53 electric-only miles. Over all, the Chevy is less efficient, at 106 miles per gallon equivalent and a 42 m.p.g. average on gasoline alone, compared with Prime’s 133 m.p.g. equivalent and 54 m.p.g. The Hyundai Ioniq plug-in hybrid, available late this fall, is estimated at 27 electric miles.Including options, my Prime tester with the Advanced package lists for $36,305. That is $3,700 less than a comparably equipped Volt. But the federal tax credits ($4,502 for the Toyota, $7,500 for the Chevy) wipe out much of the difference.Pencils down. Time for some fun.Compared with the departing generation, this Prius provides a little more engagement. It crisply tracks corners and keeps road noise at bay. This is a comfortable car, not overtly sporty. Toyota has inched closer to Honda’s driving dynamics. (The Honda Clarity plug-in hybrid, with an estimated 42-mile E.V. range, is waiting in the wings.)Electric motors provide satisfying torque when pulling away from stoplights. Spunky enough off the line, Prime quickly becomes lethargic. Car and Driver clocks 0-to-60 miles an hour in 12.2 seconds in E.V. mode and 10.2 in hybrid mode. Volt does it in 7.9 E.V. and 7.4 hybrid.Commendably, Toyota is making automatic emergency braking standard on nearly all its vehicles. Prime’s safety system includes adaptive cruise control that works down to a full stop. Good stuff.Both Prius and Prius Prime get a 1.8-liter 4-cylinder gas engine. Prime uses the same two electric motor/generators as a standard Prius does (a motor becomes a generator when turning in reverse). Prime adds a new clutch, allowing the smallest motor/generator to chip in extra drive force. Total system power to the front tires is 121 horsepower.Under hard throttle, the continuously variable transmission has the mild elastic quality common to C.V.T.s. It’s best to leave Prime in Auto E.V. mode. Hybrid mode lets drivers save the battery for urban driving, where it’s most efficient. Eco and Sport settings do not radically transform the experience.Prime’s big change is a larger lithium-ion battery pack, which raises the cargo floor a few inches. A standard Prius takes on six carry-on suitcases with the back seats usable. That’s two more than the Prime.Toyota recommends a dedicated 15-amp circuit to charge Prime on 120-volt current (taking about five and a half hours if the battery is fully spent). On 240 current, it’s two hours and 10 minutes.Shamu must have chosen my tester’s white-on-ebony interior. This bright instrument panel calls for sunglasses on sunny days. A full black instrument panel is available. Volt and Ioniq get traditional gauge clusters in front of the driver. Toyota’s gauges remain centered, making the head-up display on Advanced models desirable. Advanced also adds semiautonomous parking.All but the $27,985 Plus model get an expansive 11.6-inch LCD touch screen. In both responsiveness and organization, the interface is a good, solid effort. The same cannot be said for the JBL sound system, the best you can get in a Prius. It lacks a full sound, and a rotary volume knob. (I’m not a fan of the touch-sensitive surface.) The switches for the heated seats are hidden low and away, nearly out of sight and reach. Minnesotans will be getting in their abdominal crunch workouts during winter months.Prime is strictly a four-seater. It seems that a center cushion would fit in the back seat area, but Toyota installed a storage console instead. Two average-size adults will be comfortable in back with generous leg and knee room. Ioniq accommodates three in back. So does Volt, but it’s more snug.Prime has different front and rear fascias. Its rear glass, held by a carbon fiber hatch frame, has a lovely complex curve. Prius’s design is polarizing, though some see the Prime’s lines as an improvement. To my eye, it’s like choosing between a hairless cat and a hairless dog. But hey, some people think they’re both cute.Is 25 miles of electric range enough (assuming the E.P.A. figure is close to actual performance)? Drag out that calculator again. Charged nightly, Prime could deliver as much as 175 miles of E.V. travel a week. That’s over 9,000 miles annually. Beyond environmental and financial reasons, think of the convenience. Most gas station stops will be for Slurpees.Prius owners are fiercely loyal, but wise shoppers check out alternatives when making major purchases. Most manufacturers build plug-in hybrids, allowing people to ease into the electric car lifestyle without range anxiety. Sure, gas is inexpensive these days. But efficiency will always be a prime virtue.