http://www.nytimes.com/1979/11/04/archives/huge-crowd-mourns-park-at-funeral-rite-in-seoul.html
Huge Crowd Mourns Park at Funeral Rite in Seoul - The New York Times
SOUTH KOREA,SOUTH KOREA,PARK CHUNG HEE,PARK CHUNG HEE,PARK CHUNG HEE,DEATHS
Nov. 4, 1979
5171
SEOUL, South Korea, Nov. 3 — President Park Chung Hee of South Korea was buried in a hilltop grave at the National Cemetery today after a state funeral and procession lasting nearly six hours.United Press InternationalSOUTH KOREAN PRESIDENT BURIED: Residents of Seoul sobbed yesterday as the funeral procession for President Park Chung Hee, who was assassinated on Oct. 26, passed on its way to the burial site at the National Cemetery. Page 6.The President's only son, Chi Man, a 21‐year‐old cadet at the Korean Military Academy, sprinkled the first symbolic spadeful of soil over his father's concretelined grave. Two of the President's daughters, Keun Hae, 27, and Keun Yong, 25, repeated the act.Mr. Park, who at the age of 61 had ruled South Korea with a stern hand for 18 years, was buried next to his wife, Yook Young Soo. She was shot to death in an assassination attempt on her husband on Aug. 15,1974.The army Martial Law Command, which has been in charge of the country since President Park was assassinated on Oct. 26, estimated that two million people lined the procession route through downtown Seoul to pay their respects.Many men and women wept as the President's closed coffin, encrusted with pink and yellow flowers, rolled by in a specially altered bus with wide picture windows to allow viewing.The President was shot to death over a dinner table eight days ago in a plot allegedly led by Kim Jae Kyu, director of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency. Military investigators said that Mr. Kim fired the fatal shots after being berated by the President's personal security chief, Cha Chi Chol, who was also slain.Mr. Park, who as a major general came to power in a bloodless military coup on May 16, 1961, was eulogized as a man who had led his segment of a nation divided at the end of World War II out of“10 centuries of poverty.”“Our country is emerging as a nation of the world and as one of the leading and newly industrialized countries,” said Prime Minister Choi Kyu Hah, who as acting President delivered the eulogy.South Korea, now a disciplined society of 39 million people, was a largely agricultural country ravaged by the Korean War when Mr. Park assumed power. Most of Korea's industry, developed during the 35‐year Japanese colonial occupation, was in the Communist North, ruled by Kim II Sung. Under President Park South Korea was transformed into a competitive industrial power.The political machinery did not similarly change, and in 1972 President Park redesigned the Constitution to perpetuate his rule.Significantly, one of his chief critics, Kim Young Sam, the leader of the opposition New Democratic Party, who was expelled from the National Assembly last month by a vote of President Park's followers, was among selected dignitaries at the Blue House, the President's office and residence, this morning.In the past Government officials have used technicalities to exclude President Park's critics from official functions.Gen. Chung Seung Hwa, the army Chief of Staff, who is in charge of administering martial law, was reportedly present at the Blue House ceremonies but was not seen by Western journalists.With an official mourning party walking behind it, President Park's coffin was taken from the Blue House to the capital steps. There Buddhist, Protestant and Roman Catholic clergymen performed a ceremony that was broadcast live over national television.Afterward the procession moved down the main avenue to the main railway station with official mourners following. From there the procession went by car across a bridge over the Han River to the National Cemetery.The United States was represented by a delegation headed by President Carter's son, Chip, and including Secretary of States Cyrus R. Vance.