http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/14/science/daylight-saving-time-dinosaur-jet-lag.html
My Dinosaur’s Jet Lag Helps Explain Why a Time Change Is Hard - The New York Times
Jet Lag,Daylight Saving Time,Biorhythms,Sleep
March 13, 2016
844
Good morning. Or confusing morning, really. Come Daylight Saving Time each year, people often complain about how thrown off they feel by the shift of an hour.I thought they were just whiny. That is, until my dinosaur got jet lag and refused to glow.Since that’s not an everyday occurrence, let me explain the dinosaur first, and then I’ll get to how my dinosaur’s problems may be connected to your own struggles to function over the next few days. (Hint: It’s not only the loss of sleep that causes problems.)Meet my dinosaur, glimmering bright, fully recovered from jet lag.Created by a company called BioPop, my Dino Pet  contains lots of itty bitty dinoflagellates. Dinoflagellates, if you are having trouble summoning a sixth-grade biology lesson, are usually ocean-dwelling, single-celled organisms also known as marine plankton. People typically encounter them when they clean the inside of their aquarium (this form is often referred “brown slime algae”) or if they happen to be kayaking through a bay filled with lots of bioluminescent ones.The ones that live in my plastic dinosaur (a Christmas gift) are the latter kind. Shake them just a bit and the transparent creatures become a glow-in-the-dark snow globe.Except that a week after I set my dinosaur up, it still refused to put on its shimmer show. I tried everything. I moved it from darker to lighter spots. I played it music and whispered encouraging words. But when I turned off the lights, my little dino remained depressingly dark.And then upon revisiting the instructions, everything was illuminated:Until now, your dinoflagellates were raised in San Diego, Calif.. They’ve been waking up at 5 a.m. and going to bed around 6 p.m. P.S.T. This is the routine they’re used to. This routine can be changed, but you have to be aware of the routine they’ve been on and be patient while they adapt to their new environment and routine.In other words, the dinoflagellates on my night stand in New York had severe jet lag.“They get used to this schedule,” said Dimitri Deheyn, BioPop’s scientific adviser and a researcher at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in San Diego.Bring guests by the BioPop lab and turn off the lights even just one hour earlier than usual and the show will be muted, he and others who work there say. (Though apparently some can get it together better than others.) Expect the dinos to perform on demand after a long journey to another time zone? Forget it.Like humans, dinoflagellates follow a roughly 24-hour circadian cycle triggered by phases of sunlight. Unlike humans who may find ways to mask their irritability, sleepiness or lack of concentration, dinoflagellates are very direct about their inability to perform when their schedule is out of whack: They simply won’t glow the same way. (A number of  biologists who have helped advance our understanding of human sleep cycles made initial circadian breakthroughs with these organisms for connected reasons.)Children can be similarly transparent, Dr. Deheyn points out.“If there is still light out, it’s definitely not time to go to bed,” he said, likening his 6-year-old son’s experience with Daylight Saving Time to that of a dino with jet lag. “Even though you try to explain the time change to him, his body will react to the light. It’s only an hour. But it takes weeks to recover from that change.”In the same vein, losing an hour is a big deal for reasons beyond lost sleep.“Remember, we have clocks in every organ in our body,” said Robert Thomas, the director of a sleep medicine fellowship at Harvard’s Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Any kind of shift, small or large, means, “You’re not just moving sleep —you’re moving your entire body. It’s like a giant ocean liner. A big ocean liner slowly chugging away. You can’t just jerk it around.”Dr. Thomas, who also runs a sleep lab focused on helping individuals with extreme sleep disorders get on a more normal schedule, takes the impact of light seriously in his home as well. Every night at 8 p.m. he turns off all the lights so as to avoid the risk of pushing his circadian system into another time zone. Because we talked on the phone closer to 9, this meant his end of the conversation was conducted in complete darkness.“If jet lag was permanent, it would probably kill us,” he said.But in the grand scheme of circadian disruptions, a biannual shift in an hour is not the end of the world for humans — or dinoflagellates.Dr. Deheyn advised dino owners to respect that their tiny pets may need a few days to adjust. (Even if dinos don’t have to be anywhere an hour earlier in their circadian cycle, they may suffer from their owners’ turning the lights on and off at new times and then expecting an unusually early performance.)“Don’t shake them too much or lower the temperature,” he said. “It’s the cumulative stress that can throw them off even more.”Humans, it seems, would benefit from a similar approach.Full dino disclosure: The dinoflagellates in the batch at top are different from my original slow-adjusting batch. After two weeks, I got only a poppy-seed sized glimmer, so I washed them down the sink. I do feel bad about this now that I know more about dinoflagellates’ circadian rhythms. But it’s possible, the people at BioPop told me while talking to them for this article, that my batch of dinos had problems beyond jet lag. My second batch offered a glimmer on day two and was shining strong by day four.