https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/23/theater/oscar-isaac-keegan-michael-key-hamlet-public-theater.html
Oscar Isaac and Keegan-Michael Key Will Star in ‘Hamlet’ at the Public Theater - The New York Times
Theater,Public Theater,Theater for a New Audience,Gold  Sam (1978- ),Isaac  Oscar,Hamlet (Play),Key  Keegan-Michael
Feb. 23, 2017
9465
Sam Gold’s “Hamlet” is happening, after all.The Tony-winning director’s embattled but nonetheless highly anticipated staging of the Shakespeare tragedy, which made headlines last summer when it was canceled at one nonprofit theater and taken to another, will run at the Public Theater from June 20 through Sept. 3, with Oscar Isaac in the title role, the Public announced on Thursday.Other cast members include Keegan-Michael Key, of Key and Peele fame, in his New York stage debut as Horatio.This “Hamlet” was originally meant to close the current season at Theater for a New Audience’s Polonsky Shakespeare Center in Brooklyn. It had been in production since 2014, but Mr. Gold parted ways with the theater — in particular its artistic director, Jeffrey Horowitz — last June over artistic differences.[ Read the full article here ]In a rare and controversial move, Mr. Gold offered his “Hamlet” to the Public, whose artistic director, Oskar Eustis, attempted to co-produce it with Theater for a New Audience. That effort failed, for logistical reasons. Last summer, the Public said that it was in talks with Mr. Gold to stage the play as part of its 2016-17 season, but until now the production hadn’t been officially confirmed or announced.Both Mr. Gold and Mr. Isaac are Public Theater veterans. Mr. Gold directed “Fun Home” there ahead of its Broadway run, for which he won a Tony. Mr. Isaac, a rising Hollywood star and a Golden Globe nominee for “Inside Llewyn Davis,” starred in “Two Gentlemen of Verona” and “Romeo and Juliet” at the Public’s Shakespeare in the Park.“The prospect of the two of them collaborating on what is arguably the greatest play ever written is joyous,” Mr. Eustis said in a statement.