http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/20/world/asia/20afghan.html
Afghan Leader Said to Accept Runoff After Election Audit - The New York Times
Afghanistan,Elections,Karzai  Hamid,Obama  Barack
Oct. 19, 2009
1804
KABUL, Afghanistan — Under heavy international pressure, President Hamid Karzai appears set to concede as early as Tuesday that he fell short of a first-round victory in the nation’s disputed presidential election, but the path to ensuring that the country has credible leadership remains uncertain, American and European officials said Monday.The officials said Mr. Karzai was moving toward accepting the findings of an international audit that stripped him of nearly a third of his votes in the first round, leaving him below the 50 percent threshold that would have allowed him to avoid a runoff and declare victory over his main rival, Abdullah Abdullah.Mr. Karzai’s apparent capitulation came after an all-out push by Obama administration officials and their European allies. But even if Mr. Karzai ends his strong resistance to a runoff, that would not resolve the country’s political crisis, officials say. It would be difficult to hold a new election quickly, as the Afghan winter approaches, and delaying the selection of a new government until the spring could allow the Taliban to make further gains across the country.As a result, some Obama administration officials, who say a pending decision on whether to increase troop levels in the country depends partly on resolving the election outcome, now argue that they should push Mr. Karzai and Mr. Abdullah to form a coalition government to avoid a runoff altogether.During a hastily arranged two-hour meeting with Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, a key foreign policy ally of President Obama, and the United States ambassador, Lt. Gen. Karl W. Eikenberry, at the presidential palace in Kabul on Monday, Mr. Karzai, after initially hesitating, agreed to accept the findings, the officials said.“He is going to announce his intentions,” Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton told reporters at the State Department. “I am going to let him do that, but I am encouraged at the direction the situation is moving.”But several administration officials cautioned that Mr. Karzai could still change his mind.For Mr. Karzai, the decision to acquiesce to the demands of the international community puts him in the position of disappointing his followers, including people who showed up at the polls despite widespread threats from the Taliban to disrupt the elections.“The dilemma for Karzai is that because of the tribal nature of Afghan society, if a constituency is angry at having a significant number of votes denied and reacts by withholding their vote in the next round, it could change the result,” said a senior administration official.The United States, this official said, is sympathetic to Mr. Karzai’s concerns, but Mrs. Clinton urged him in calls over the last few days, to be a “statesman” and accept the results.For the Obama administration, the decision prolongs an already lengthy election process that has left them with a variety of options, none of them ideal. There is a growing debate within the administration and among Western allies about whether to urge Mr. Karzai and Mr. Abdullah to try to form a power-sharing or unity government in lieu of a runoff, administration officials said.But that prospect, too, is fraught with tension, since the two men have been fierce rivals during the presidential campaign and its long aftermath.A second senior administration official said some American diplomats and allies were pressing for a negotiated settlement, but were trying not to be too involved for fear of looking like they are interfering.“If you jam it, it has no legitimacy and you’re further behind,” the official said. So instead, the administration is “creating conditions” so that the Afghans come to see a negotiated deal as in their own interests. “If they want an election, an election it will be,” the official said.A panel of experts appointed by the United Nations issued findings for the first time on Monday showing that fraud was so pervasive that nearly a quarter of all votes were thrown out, and that Mr. Karzai had not won the Aug. 20 election outright, according to an analysis of the findings by The New York Times.The findings are a defining moment for Mr. Karzai, who initially received 54 percent of the vote, and who says he believes he is the rightful winner. Mr. Karzai initially indicated that he might reject the findings, a Western official said.Besides Mr. Kerry and General Eikenberry, Mr. Karzai was also pushed hard by Prime Minister Gordon Brown of Britain during a telephone call on Monday, European officials said.Obama administration officials have tried to use Mr. Obama’s pending strategy review on Afghanistan as leverage on Mr. Karzai, telling their Afghan counterparts that Mr. Obama will not make a decision to add to the 68,000 American troops in the country until Mr. Karzai agrees to accept the election outcome.On Sunday, Mr. Obama’s chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel, said in television interviews that the administration must first ensure it has a “credible” partner in the Afghan government before making a decision to send more troops. “That message has been conveyed to the highest levels of the Afghan leadership,” an American official said.Legally, Mr. Karzai has few options. A runoff in two weeks is mandated under Afghanistan’s Constitution. But Mr. Karzai could use his broad influence over Afghan institutions — the Supreme Court and the commission that is formally required to certify Monday’s results — as a way of rejecting the results. It was that commission that had formally declared him as the winner in the first place.And while officials from the commission, the Independent Election Commission, have declined to answer calls for comment, foreign officials involved in the election process said it was an open question what such institutions would decide.  One official said, “The possibility of Supreme Court intervention has always been looming over this process.”The Obama administration registered its concern. Mr. Kerry made a last-minute stop in Kabul on Monday night, en route from Pakistan, and met Mr. Karzai in the presidential palace, “to continue his discussions and consultations,” according to a spokeswoman for the American Embassy in Kabul.A spokesman for Mr. Karzai’s campaign, Wahid Omar, denied Mr. Karzai had initially refused to accept results, saying he was waiting for the commission to certify Monday’s findings before acting. But a member of Mr. Karzai’s campaign, Mouin Marastyal, reiterated criticisms of the audit process, questioning its methodology. “They’ve changed the formula many times,” he said in a telephone interview.An official from the foreign-led team who conducted the audit said they met with Independent Election Commission officials on Sunday to explain the methodology, and that those officials voiced no objections.The deputy campaign manager for Mr. Abdullah, Mr. Karzai’s main challenger, said their camp was watching Mr. Karzai closely, and that they were preparing for a second round. “If Karzai doesn’t accept this, that means he’s ignoring the law,” said the deputy, Salih Muhammed Registani. “Afghanistan would face a legitimacy crisis.”