https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/21/us/berkeley-ann-coulter-speech.html
Berkeley Is Being Tested on 2 Fronts: Free Speech and Safety - The New York Times
Coulter  Ann,University of California  Berkeley,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Freedom of Speech and Expression,Colleges and Universities
April 21, 2017
6647
BERKELEY, Calif. — In explaining why it had canceled a speech by Ann Coulter scheduled for next week, the University of California, Berkeley, said that it had “very specific intelligence” that Ms. Coulter might be in “grave danger.”To Ms. Coulter and her supporters, it was another example of Berkeley showing intolerance of any opinions other than the liberal ones it is famous for. But the university that championed free expression in the 1960s has become known, in the polarizing first months of the Trump presidency, as something more: a meeting ground for those wanting to express themselves with wooden clubs and fists.Days after fights broke out between anarchists and right-wing groups near campus, and a couple of months after masked protesters smashed windows and set fires to stop a speech by the incendiary right-wing writer Milo Yiannopoulos, the police are preparing for a possible replay if Ms. Coulter follows through on her vow to show up anyway on Thursday.“The city and campus have become the stage on which the national political tensions are playing out,” said Dan Mogulof, a spokesman for the university. “Coming here, they know they will be able to find an opponent pretty easily.”Berkeley now finds itself bracing, essentially, for two battles.One is with Ms. Coulter and the groups bringing her to campus, the Young America’s Foundation and the university’s College Republicans. The groups have threatened to sue the university, saying its offer to allow Ms. Coulter to speak the next week, and in the early afternoon, when fewer students will be around to hear her, “violate fundamental principles of free speech, equal protection and due process guaranteed by the United States Constitution.”The other is a potential physical confrontation. Leftist activists on and off campus, including a loosely organized group calling itself Antifa, for “anti-fascist,” are threatening to do anything they can to block Ms. Coulter from speaking. Right-wing supporters are gathering support on Facebook, making plans to come to the campus to defend her.“Our basic thing is to send a loud and clear message that this is not acceptable on our campus,” said Hoku Jeffrey, a Berkeley graduate and national organizer for By Any Means Necessary, a group that took part in previous demonstrations that turned violent. “We will not tolerate anti-immigrant bigotry or bigotry of any kind, which is the only thing she’s here to do.”On Sean Hannity’s show on Thursday on Fox News, Ms. Coulter, never one to let a pot go unstirred, mocked her liberal protesters as “beta males” engaging in “Rodney King riots.” And Mr. Yiannopoulos, seizing the moment, said Friday on Facebook that he would hold a “Milo’s Free Speech Week” on campus this year — “whether university administrators and violent far-left antifa thugs like it or not.”Meanwhile, Johnny Benitez of Orange County, in Southern California, said he was organizing a group of conservatives to show up in Berkeley. He was part of a group that showed up last weekend for demonstrations that ultimately led to 20 arrests.“I don’t really have a connection to Berkeley,” said Mr. Benitez, 28. “The reason we go there is to support people who feel that their First Amendment rights are being infringed, our fellow conservatives in the city of Berkeley. The people I’m mostly organizing are coming from six hours away.”Mr. Benitez said that his group would arrive unarmed, as they did last weekend. But in recent confrontations, demonstrators have turned rocks, fireworks and police barricades into weapons — even using a bike lock to wallop someone in the head.“The way that they assemble, the tactics that they used, it has not been seen in this region,” said Capt. Alex Yao, the acting chief of the university police force, at a briefing on Thursday.Some colleges and universities, like Berkeley, have asked that speakers likely to draw protests appear in the afternoon, when crowds are more controllable than in the evening. Mr. Mogulof, the university spokesman, said Friday that the university was within its rights in setting a day, time and venue that would be “safe for participants.”“We are confident that we are on very solid legal grounds,” Mr. Mogulof said in an email. “The constitution permits the university to take such steps to protect public safety while facilitating expressive activities, and that is exactly what we are doing.”Peaceful activism remains a hallmark of the university. On Thursday, students representing the International Socialist Organization handed out fliers for May Day demonstrations amid a half-dozen other booths by organizations trying to lure students to support their causes.At the same time, Berkeley’s reputation as a campus fully engaged in the divisive politics of the day is in some ways at odds with the desire of many students to study, enjoy college life and graduate from one of the country’s premier public universities.On Thursday, as university officials strategized on how to handle Ms. Coulter’s demands, thousands of students lounged on a lawn outside a library building and smoked pot in celebration of April 20, a kind of national holiday for marijuana lovers.“Ann Coulter? What are you talking about?” a woman selling doughnuts as a fund-raiser for her sorority told a reporter. “I don’t know about that at all.”Isaac Meyer, a nuclear engineering student from Bakersfield, Calif., said that while he knew the bare outlines of the Coulter controversy, “most people don’t have the mental energy to be upset about it.”Mr. Meyer, a senior, said that he had taken part in Black Lives Matter protests and that many students attended a women’s march on Jan. 21. But he said he had no interest in attending the recent protests that turned violent.“Most of the people I know, when we find out about a protest like that, we think, ‘Oh, well, we can’t walk to that part of campus today,’” he said.Veterans of the Free Speech Movement of the ’60s, a seminal moment in the university’s history, are disheartened that Berkeley is now associated with violence and blocking speech instead of promoting it.“I don’t think Ann Coulter has anything useful to say, but it was unconstitutional for the university to bar her from speaking,” said Lynne Hollander Savio, who took part in the movement and is the widow of Mario Savio, its leading spokesman.Ms. Savio sees a clear generational divide. Free speech, she said, was more of an absolute for her husband, who is commemorated outside Sproul Hall at the heart of the campus by the officially designated Mario Savio Steps.“Mario took a principled position — it was free speech for all,” she said. “I think free speech has slipped as a value.”Or rather, it has been gleefully co-opted by some on the right. On his Facebook post announcing his plans for a weeklong visit to Berkeley, Mr. Yiannopoulos said that each day would be “dedicated to a different enemy of free speech, including feminism, Black Lives Matter and Islam.”He also wrote that he would give a prize to whoever has done the “most to protect free expression at UC Berkeley and its surrounding area.”He said it would be called the Mario Savio Award.