http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/14/world/africa/14darfur.html
Sudan Arrests Militia Chief Facing Trial - The New York Times
Sudan,Darfur (Sudan),International Criminal Court,Kushayb  Ali,War Crimes  Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity,Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare
Oct. 13, 2008
3113
NAIROBI, Kenya — The Sudanese government has arrested one of the most wanted men in the country, a notorious janjaweed militia leader charged by an international court with orchestrating mass murder in Darfur, Sudanese officials disclosed on Monday.The move is widely being interpreted as a way for Sudan to improve its image abroad and try to head off the possible genocide prosecution of the country’s president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, in the International Criminal Court.Human rights groups have said the militia leader, Ali Kushayb— also known as Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-al-Rahman and the “colonel of colonels” — led attacks on civilians and ordered villages to be burned to the ground and the women in them raped.In 2007, the International Criminal Court charged him with crimes against humanity and demanded that Sudan hand him over. Sudan refused, denying that he had done anything wrong and insisting that any criminals it did arrest would be handled in its own courts.But with Sudan under increasing pressure to curb the violence in Darfur and Mr. Bashir being pursued by international prosecutors, the government appears to have changed its tack. Mr. Kushayb is now in police custody, said Rabie A. Atti, a government spokesman, without disclosing where he was being kept. Nor did he say whether the government would turn the militia leader over to the international court.“We are investigating him to see if he has committed crimes in Darfur or not,” Mr. Rabie said Monday evening.Shortly afterward, Sudan’s  justice minister reiterated the government’s longstanding position that it would conduct its own trials for war crimes suspects, according to The Associated Press.In July, the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in The Hague formally requested an arrest warrant for Mr. Bashir, saying that he had “masterminded” massacres in Darfur and that he should stand trial for genocide. The judges in The Hague are deliberating whether to push ahead with the prosecution. African and Arab leaders are urging the court to drop the case, arguing that it could unleash a backlash against civilians and aid workers and lessen the dim prospects for peace in Darfur, a region in western Sudan where hundreds of thousands of people have died in a complex conflict that seems to have no end.In August, Sudanese officials said they had been offered a deal by France in which they would hand over another suspect, Ahmad Harun, a government minister accused by the international court of war crimes, in exchange for a suspension of Mr. Bashir’s prosecution. In that light, the arrest of Mr. Kushayb could be a compromise on a compromise. Instead of giving up a government minister who is suspected of committing wide-scale atrocities, the Sudanese have chosen to arrest a tribal leader who is one degree of separation away from the government.Analysts said the arrest might help the Sudanese authorities appear to be cooperating, without going after one of their own.“Whilst my heart hopes that this is the start of a real, Sudanese-led, judicial process, my head tells me it’s yet another ploy by Khartoum to buy some time,” said James Smith, chief executive of Aegis Trust, an antigenocide group.But when asked if Mr. Kushayb had become a bargaining chip, Mr. Rabie said no.“This is not something for show,” he said. “This is part of President Omar Hassan al-Bashir’s commitment to bring a final and comprehensive solution to Darfur.”