https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/30/us/politics/walter-shaub-ethics.html
A Vocal Defender of Ethics Has Fans — and Foes - The New York Times
Shaub  Walter M Jr,Ethics and Official Misconduct,United States Politics and Government,Office of Government Ethics,Trump  Donald J
May 30, 2017
1035
WASHINGTON — Walter M. Shaub’s term as the government’s top ethics watchdog does not expire until next January, but his corner office here, just a few blocks from the White House, looks unoccupied.No diplomas line the wood-paneled walls. No family photos or mementos. Just standard government-issue furniture, his humming computer and four large paintings. Mr. Shaub wanted to get rid of those, too, but his chief of staff warned that it might scare the 70 other employees in the Office of Government Ethics.“I wanted to not be so attached to this office that I’d be afraid to lose it,” Mr. Shaub said on Friday, surveying the room he packed up shortly before Inauguration Day.For a man and agency that have long labored in obscurity, that does not seem such a far-off possibility these days. Ethics have been thrust to the forefront in President Trump’s Washington, where the president’s own vast holdings and those of his asset-rich cabinet and advisers from businesses and lobbying firms have raised many accusations  of conflicts of interest.Mr. Shaub, 46, has emerged as one of the few voices from within the government willing to second-guess the president and his advisers. At first quietly and then in a rare public speech here in January, Mr. Shaub tried to nudge Mr. Trump toward the only financial arrangement he felt was truly ethical — the total liquidation of his vast business and personal holdings.He failed. But that confrontation and a string of others in the months since have given Mr. Shaub, a self-effacing career bureaucrat more comfortable parsing legal arguments and wonkish ethics guidelines, the reputation of a fighter. Admiring fans have put his face on T-shirts. He even has a Facebook fan group, with more than 1,000 likes.“The story of Walter Shaub is to some extent the story of our American system of checks and balances that has stepped up beyond expectation to defend the Constitution and the law when Trump oversteps,” said Norman Eisen, the Obama administration’s first ethics counsel. Mr. Shaub, he added, might well be “the unlikeliest star of 2017.”Republicans do not see it that way. The president’s chief of staff, Reince Priebus, warned Mr. Shaub on national television to “be careful” of criticizing the president. Outside groups have pointed to a handful of donations he made to Democratic campaigns in 2008 and 2012 as evidence of bias.For Mr. Shaub, who has spent the better part of 15 years in the ethics office — mostly as a career civil servant — the experience has been as confounding as it is exhausting.“If you really look at things, all I’ve done is stand still. It’s the world that is moving around me,” Mr. Shaub said. “And that’s seen as some radical act.”If he has become more outwardly vocal than directors past, he said, it is because this particular White House has shown little interest in an ethics program that both Republicans and Democrats have long supported. His public remarks, he added, came only after he felt the usual private channels of communication with the Trump team were not working.“I’m not fighting against him. I’m fighting for the ethics program. And there is a difference,” Mr. Shaub said. “Because if I succeed, he’ll benefit.”Mr. Shaub has had some success. Though Mr. Trump ultimately put his assets into a so-called half-blind trust that Mr. Shaub has called ineffectual, the ethics office has worked closely and productively to steer the president’s nominees through necessary financial disclosures and ethics agreements.Mr. Trump’s budget director, Mick Mulvaney, tried to block what Mr. Shaub and others said was a standard request for the names of former lobbyists who had been granted waivers to work in the Trump administration.On Friday, after Mr. Shaub wrote a long and heavily footnoted letter to Mr. Mulvaney, the White House unexpectedly backed down.The White House declined to comment on Mr. Shaub.The Office of Government Ethics is not usually a breeding ground for political stardom — or conflict. Set up in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal, its job is to work with a network of ethics offices in federal agencies to oversee ethical standards for 2.7 million civilian government employees. This means examining financial disclosure reports issued by political employees, to help these new hires decide which assets they must sell to avoid a conflict of interest. The office also helps ensure that once new political employees are hired, they honor restrictions from participating in deliberations over topics they handled for paying clients.Though the president is not strictly beholden to those laws, the ethics office has always relied on support from the top to send a message to the rest of the federal work force that its program needs to be taken seriously. The office, agency veterans say, has long prided itself on being nonpartisan, not least because its effective operation depends on strong relationships with whichever party is in the White House.The son of a government chemist, Mr. Shaub grew up in the Washington suburbs with a sense that whatever he chose to do, it ought to entail public service. An interest in ethics only came later, after degrees in history at James Madison University and law at American University. (Two decades later, his own financial disclosure forms show, Mr. Shaub is still paying off student debt.)In a city where the line between work and socializing often blurs, Mr. Shaub has mostly kept his worlds separate. His interests tend toward the geeky, friends say, like zombie stories and film noir. “He would enjoy puns, especially ones where people would just groan,” said Don Fox, a longtime top agency official. Pop culture, with the possible exception of Harry Potter stories, less so.“He speaks loudly. He tells funny jokes. He rushes up and down the hall,” said Marilyn Glynn, who hired Mr. Shaub in 2001 and helped recruit him back to the agency in 2006 after a brief stint in the private sector. “You can’t miss him. It’s like a little bit of a hurricane in the office.”It was in 2006 that Mr. Shaub first began formally working on ethics issues, overseeing the office’s program guiding 1,100 or so presidential nominees through legally required financial disclosures. He turned the program around, writing standardized handbooks to speed up a typically ornery process and developed a reputation among Democrats and Republicans in the White House as a stern, but highly proficient, steward.“I’d call him up on a Thursday or Friday night and say we need to get this done over the weekend, and he would get the ethics lawyers and the agencies to stay and get it done,” said Richard W. Painter, who served as ethics counsel for the George W. Bush White House. He has vocally defended Mr. Shaub’s approach in recent months.When Mr. Obama nominated Mr. Shaub for the agency’s top job and its only politically appointed post four years later, Congress approved him by voice vote, a rare sign of shared confidence from an otherwise sharply divided Congress. The first four years of his tenure have borne that out, colleagues say. Mr. Shaub has spent the bulk of his time pursuing prosaic bureaucratic reforms like file digitization and developing an online training program for the government’s varied ethics officers.“This is not a guy who came from the outside and sees this as a great platform for becoming famous,” said Danielle Brian, the executive director of the nonpartisan Project on Government Oversight. “This is a guy who has been working quietly for a long time on ethics issues.”In the ethics office’s fifth-floor suite here, though, those days feel like a distant memory. Presidential transitions always bring a tsunami of work, but the spotlight trained on the agency this time around has only added stress. Employees have taken to meeting for 10 minutes a day to meditate in a dimly lit conference room.Rick Thomas, a close friend who helped recruit Mr. Shaub to the agency almost two decades ago, said Mr. Shaub had more or less made his peace with his role, even if it means he may be fired before his term’s end. He recalled that when Mr. Shaub was first weighing whether to speak out in opposition to Mr. Trump’s conflict of interest plan, the director turned to a line from Albus Dumbledore, the sagacious wizard who tutors Harry Potter in the ways of the world.“Something to the effect that, ‘There will be a time when we must choose between what’s easy and what’s right,’” Mr. Thomas recalled Mr. Shaub saying over the phone.“Believe me,” he said, “there was a lot of angst over that.”