https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/briefing/mosul-hamburg-wimbledon.html
Mosul, Hamburg, Wimbledon: Your Monday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 10, 2017
4005
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Iraq’s prime minister declared victory and congratulated his armed forces for wresting Mosul, the country’s second-largest city, from the Islamic State.But government troops were still mopping up pockets of resistance and expected guerrilla attacks for weeks to come. Analysts warn that ISIS, despite its losses, remains a potent force for inspiring global terrorism.Meanwhile, the U.S., Russia and Jordan agreed on fostering a cease-fire in Syria’s southwest. Peace talks in Geneva resume today._____• The residents of Hamburg, Germany, are assessing (and cleaning up) the damage left behind by violent clashes on the sidelines of the G-20 summit meeting.In a victory for Chancellor Angela Merkel, world leaders declared they would move forward on climate change without the U.S. It was also a sign that European leaders have stopped trying to paper over their differences with the Trump administration.For President Trump, the trip to Europe was a surprising early high point in his presidency. Especially in Poland, he found that there might be a market for conservative nationalism._____• Russia cheered Mr. Trump’s meeting with President Vladimir Putin, and Mr. Trump took to Twitter to declare that it was time for the U.S. to work constructively with the Kremlin, despite the invasion of Ukraine and meddling in the American presidential election.Mr. Trump announced, then backed away from, a potential cybersecurity initiative with Moscow, a shift that prompted bipartisan derision.White House advisers told our reporters that Mr. Trump’s eldest son agreed to meet with a Kremlin-connected Russian lawyer during the U.S. presidential election after being promised damaging information about Hillary Clinton.They met at Trump Tower on June 9, 2016, along with Paul Manafort, then the Trump campaign chairman, and Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law._____• “We will revolt against injustice.” In Turkey, hundreds of thousands of protesters arrived in Istanbul in the culmination of a three-week march from Ankara that was led by politicians from the main opposition party.Participants condemned President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s widening crackdown on dissent after a failed coup last July.Rex Tillerson, the U.S. secretary of state, “praised the Turkish people — brave men and women” who “stood up against coup plotters and defended their democracy,” as he met his Turkish counterpart in Ankara on Sunday. He did not mention the crackdown._____• Steep mountain climbs and daredevil descents made the Tour de France’s Stage 9 the most grueling so far. Several riders, including Richie Porte, above, crashed. Chris Froome retained his overall lead.At Wimbledon, all the fourth-round singles matches will be played on Manic Monday. “I love this day,” Dominic Thiem’s coach told us. “Everything seems possible.” Here’s today’s schedule.Finally, Wayne Rooney, one of the best soccer players England has produced, returned to Everton F.C., where his career began. For the club, it was a decision made with the heart rather than the head, our correspondent writes._____• The cost of electric cars is falling much faster than expected, based in part on a plunge in battery prices and aggressive policies in China and Europe.• The arrest of a Volkswagen executive suggests that U.S. federal investigators examining the company’s emissions scandal could seek to pressure lower-level employees to testify against their superiors.• A group of news organizations in the U.S. is seeking bargaining rights against Facebook and Google over the online behemoths’ dominance in digital advertising and distribution.• AT&T’s $85.4 billion bid for Time Warner is mired in uncertainty, as White House critics fear potential political interference and business leaders watch for a precedent to their own acquisitions.•  Here’s a snapshot of global markets.• No one appeared to have been injured by a fire that erupted at Camden Lock Market, a popular tourist destination in London. [Associated Press]• Firefighters in London say a lack of equipment, particularly fire engines with sufficiently long ladders, impeded rescue efforts during the Grenfell Tower blaze. [The New York Times]• In Kiev, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said that the U.S. would not lift sanctions against Russia until Moscow restores Ukraine’s “territorial integrity.” [The New York Times]• Seven years ago, a self-immolation of a vendor in Tunisia set off the Arab Spring. Now, such grim acts have become commonplace. [The New York Times]• In Yemen, cholera has infected more than 269,000 people and killed at least 1,614, according to Unicef. [The New York Times]• Moscow’s Bolshoi Theater abruptly canceled a show about Rudolf Nureyev, a ballet dancer who defected to the West in 1961. [The Guardian]Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Working out in the hot weather? Try a hot bath beforehand.• Make a batch of the Ritz-Carlton’s blueberry muffins, and enjoy them in the morning with coffee.• Unesco added new sites to its World Heritage List. Among them: the ancient core of Hebron in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Asmara, the Eritrean capital, and England’s Lake District, above.• A new study sheds light on why coral glows in the deep, dark sea. It shines to drive photosynthesis for algae, which in turn create food for the coral.• Haha or ha? Digital laughter can be used for all kinds of activities, including flirtation or conveying skepticism. Here’s a look at the micronuances.• Test your knowledge of international affairs with our global news quiz. (We also have a weekly health quiz.)Like music? Then you might want to check out the Montreux Jazz Festival.It’s underway on the shores of Lake Geneva in Switzerland. If you happen to be — like us — elsewhere, you can stream the concerts live on the festival’s website.Once devoted almost entirely to European jazz, it has evolved into something far more inclusive. Its founder, Claude Nobs, was criticized for continuing to use the term “jazz” to describe the event even after other styles of music were introduced.“Montreux Jazz is a brand name, and most of the people know what to expect,” Mr. Nobs, who died in 2013, said in a 2006 interview with Billboard magazine.This year, the festival’s eclectic program included sold-out concerts by the British pop stars The Pet Shop Boys and the American R&B singer Lauryn Hill. The Senegalese singer Youssou N’Dour is scheduled to perform on the final day, Saturday.The festival has also been a prolific venue for recording. The pianist Bill Evans recorded a Grammy-winning album there in the second year, kicking off a series that comprises what is now an extensive audio archive recognized by Unesco.Palko Karasz contributed reporting._____This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters here.Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com.