http://www.nytimes.com/2002/01/05/world/a-nation-challenged-the-captives-prison-packed-with-taliban-raises-concern.html
A NATION CHALLENGED: THE CAPTIVES; Prison Packed With Taliban Raises Concern - The New York Times
NEW YORK CITY,SHIBARGHAN (AFGHANISTAN),PAKISTAN,KOHAT (PAKISTAN),WASHINGTON (DC),AFGHANISTAN,TALIBAN,AL QAEDA,RED CROSS,DOSTUM  ABDUL RASHID,WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC),AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES,PENTAGON BUILDING,PRISONERS OF WAR,HIJACKING,TERRORISM,UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE
Jan. 5, 2002
5833
In the month since the collapse of the Taliban government in Afghanistan, nearly 3,500 former Taliban fighters have been held here in a prison built for 800, under conditions that are raising alarm among international aid groups.The prisoners are being interrogated by United States investigators, but their jailer is Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, Afghanistan's new deputy defense minister and an ethnic Uzbek warlord whose reputation for brutality has been well documented over the last 20 years. Neither the Afghan authorities nor the United States forces here are saying what the prisoners' ultimate fate will be.The International Committee of the Red Cross, which has visited and registered prisoners here in Shibarghan, first raised concern about overcrowding and unsanitary conditions last week, after a prisoner fell sick and died in one of the cells. Dozens more, the agency said, have fallen ill with dysentery.One hundred and forty other former Taliban fighters are imprisoned in Kohat, Pakistan, south of the border city of Peshawar. They, too, are undergoing interrogation by American officials, and residents there have complained about what they say is mistreatment of the prisoners.A local political leader in Kohat has protested the treatment of Al Qaeda members who were turned over to the Americans. The leader, Javed Ibrahim Paracha, said the prisoners were handcuffed, shackled and stripped to their shorts, before being loaded on military planes in the middle of the night.''People in Kohat are becoming united against the treatment of these mujahedeen,'' Mr. Paracha said in an interview. ''We don't know why they are being treated this way. That's why we are angry.''He also called for an investigation of a gun battle between prisoners and Pakistani border guards on Dec. 19, which broke out during the transfer of 156 Al Qaeda fighters from the border town of Parachinar to Kohat.The gunfire erupted after the prisoners overpowered the troops who were guarding them. Six Al Qaeda fighters and 9 guards were killed, while 41 prisoners escaped into the nearby hills. The graves of some of the slain prisoners have already become shrines, visited by crowds of local people.In Shibarghan, which is in the north near the border with Turkmenistan, an American commander said that he had not been inside the prison, where detainees are said to be crammed 50 to a cell, and that he knew nothing about conditions there.''We have a mission to process the detainees, and we are doing that as quickly as we can, while treating them with dignity and respect,'' said the commander of the operation, Col. Kevin Wilkerson of the Army's 10th Mountain Division.Human rights officials say the close involvement of United States forces with General Dostum and his officials means that the Americans have a responsibility to ensure good treatment of the prisoners.''They are being held by the Afghan authorities, and the primary responsibility is theirs, but it is obvious that the more the U.S. and international community become involved, there is a responsibility to see the Afghans have the logistical resources and technical ability to ensure good treatment,'' said James Ross, a senior legal adviser at the New York-based Human Rights Watch.In Afghanistan, the United States Army is embarked on a long mission to register the prisoners and interrogate those who may be able to provide valuable information about Osama bin Laden's Qaeda terrorist network. Eighty-five of the prisoners in Shibarghan had been sent to the American base in Kandahar by Tuesday, Colonel Wilkerson said, but he could not say what would happen to them after that. Senior defense officials in Washington have said a new prison camp is being built at the naval base at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, to hold senior Al Qaeda and Taliban members.The Afghan authorities here contend that any delay in releasing or transferring prisoners from Shibarghan is the result of their efforts to accommodate American officials in their interrogations.Usman Khan, the intelligence chief in Shibarghan, said in an interview today that any decision on custody arrangements would wait until the United States had finished screening all prisoners and transferring those they wish to detain further. He said that would take a week more.''First, we will remove all the foreign prisoners and Al Qaeda people, and then we will wait for orders on the rest,'' he said.General Dostum said last week that he would not free any Taliban prisoners until he had established whether they had committed crimes.At the Pakistani prison, people familiar with the intelligence-gathering operation said interrogators were having some success.''They have given evidence that Al Qaeda is still active in Pakistan and other countries,'' said a Pakistani official. ''If their leaders are at large, they could still be planning something.''Some prisoners claim to have seen Mr. bin Laden and said he seemed to be in good shape. They said the sighting occurred six days before they were arrested in mid-December. That would have been shortly after Mr. bin Laden was believed to have recorded a videotaped message, in which he looked tired and gaunt.People who have had access to the prisoners say that aside from the rigorous daily interrogations, they are receiving adequate care. Several are suffering from frostbite after fleeing across the wintry mountains near Tora Bora, in eastern Afghanistan. Others are afflicted by various gastrointestinal illnesses.Still, the inmates have not given the investigators the information they most want. And so the atmosphere is tense.''They are not torturing the prisoners,'' said one person who has been inside the jail in recent days. ''But they are asking tough questions, which is irritating them.''The concerns about prisoners held by General Dostum follow unconfirmed reports that anti-Taliban troops killed some of them last month as they were being transported from the town of Kunduz to the prison at Shibarghan, General Dostum's hometown. The shipping containers holding the prisoners stopped overnight at Qala Zeina, the fortified western gates to the city of Mazar-i-Sharif and, according to some survivors, troops opened fire.A witness close to General Dostum's inner circle said he had seen three or four bullet-ridden containers and blood running from them. He blamed ethnic Hazara soldiers, but soldiers now guarding Qala Zeina said it had been Uzbek troops belonging to General Dostum.These accounts, added to previous reports of deaths of prisoners by asphyxiation in the shipping containers, have continued to follow General Dostum, who took charge of some 4,000 prisoners when he orchestrated the mass surrender of Taliban fighters from Kunduz in late November.Mr. Usman Khan, his intelligence chief, said the reports of killings were ''completely untrue,'' and he repeated the official count that only 43 prisoners died of wounds or asphyxiation.General Dostum has also forcibly returned at least 10 Uzbek prisoners to neighboring Uzbekistan, Mr. Usman Khan confirmed on Tuesday. That move was taken apparently without consultation with the interim government in Kabul, after Uzbekistan's president, Islam Karimov, put pressure on General Dostum and his officials to turn over the prisoners, who were members of the outlawed Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. The prisoners, who said they faced almost certain death on terrorism charges, had said they wanted to claim political asylum in Afghanistan.General Dostum said he had turned the men over to United States forces. It is not clear whether American investigators held or questioned the men before they were sent back to Uzbekistan.A spokeswoman for the United Nations high commissioner for refugees, Maki Shinohara, said that she was unaware of the case of the Uzbeks, but that if forcible repatriation had occurred without allowing the individuals to request asylum, then her agency would raise the issue with the Afghan government. The agency would normally handle requests for political asylum and is already expecting to have to deal with some requests from among foreign Taliban prisoners, but it has yet to discuss the issue with the new Afghan government, she said.Even though the United States regards the Taliban prisoners as detainees, those taken into American custody would be afforded the treatment of prisoners of war under the Geneva Convention, said Capt. Chris Soucie, a judge advocate with the 10th Mountain Division. The Red Cross insists that prisoners taken into custody by the United States or any of its coalition allies become prisoners of war and should be treated as such. One of their rights is that a prisoner of war should not be repatriated against his will while hostilities are still going on.