http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/22/business/international/vw-executive-had-a-pivotal-role-as-car-maker-struggled-with-emissions.html
VW Executive Had a Pivotal Role as Car Maker Struggled With Emissions - The New York Times
Hatz  Wolfgang,Volkswagen AG,Fuel Emissions (Transportation),Diesel Power,Air Pollution,Muller  Matthias (1953- ),Winterkorn  Martin,Automobile Safety Features and Defects
Dec. 21, 2015
6736
LONDON —  A few months after taking over engine development at Volkswagen in 2007, Wolfgang Hatz faced a potential challenge that he considered insurmountable. It was the State of California.Regulators there were seeking to limit global warming gases released by automobiles, a step never directly taken before in the United States.“We can do quite a bit and we will do a bit, but ‘impossible’ we cannot do,” Mr. Hatz said during a trip to San Francisco that year, where he took part in a technology demonstration hosted by Volkswagen. “From my point of view, the C.A.R.B. is not realistic,” he said of the California Air Resources Board, in remarks filmed by an auto website during the event.Of the proposed regulation, he said, “I see it as nearly impossible for us.”In September of this year, Volkswagen, then the world’s largest automaker, admitted to installing software designed to cheat on emissions tests, setting off one of the largest corporate scandals in the industry’s history. The role of Mr. Hatz, one of the first employees suspended by the company when the crisis broke, is considered a pivotal one in myriad investigations into Volkswagen’s decision-making by prosecutors in the United States, Germany and elsewhere.Mr. Hatz, 56, was one of a coterie of executives from VW’s Audi brand brought over to run the parent company in 2007 by Martin Winterkorn, who was Audi’s chief until he took over as VW’s chief executive that year. One of Mr. Winterkorn’s first moves was to name Mr. Hatz, the head of engines and transmission development at Audi, to do the same job for the entire company.Mr. Hatz’s elevation came during a bitter internal clash about what kind of emissions technology Volkswagen should use to ensure that the company’s diesels would comply with tougher American emissions standards — a clash that ultimately led the company to cheat on emissions tests. While Mr. Hatz was an advocate for diesels, he has also spoken out in the past about the struggle to meet regulations in the American market, according to a review of his statements and public records.Mr. Hatz declined to comment through a spokesman at Porsche, where he has served on the management board as chief of research and development.A blunt-spoken engineer with a love of motor sports, Mr. Hatz was born in Baden-Baden and has had an itinerant career, working at BMW, Fiat and General Motors, as well as at Porsche in a stint in the early 1990s. Asked in one interview what his favorite car was, he cited a 1990s Porsche 911 Carrera, “because I developed it.”As Volkswagen’s engine chief, he pushed to expand use of diesels. “It is very clear to me that diesel is the only way we will meet future emissions requirements,” he once told a trade publication. But he also struggled with a common challenge for automakers: how to make cars alluring and peppy while meeting ever-tougher regulations.He mused about dropping muscular diesel engines into sporty cars like the Audi R8 coupe — “My dream is an R8 with a diesel engine,” he said at the Los Angeles auto show in 2007. At the same time, he had to bring engines to market that could meet a complex suite of toughening regulations in the United States, particularly in California and other states like New York that opt to follow California’s more stringent air quality rules.“We will do what is possible, but we should keep the pleasure” and keep cars “fun to drive,” he said in remarks in October 2007 at the California technology demonstration. His remarks were filmed by DrivingtheNation.com, an auto website.“It’s not just about transport; our business, it’s also about pleasure,” he said.While Mr. Hatz was referring to carbon dioxide regulations, and Volkswagen’s cheating scandal is centered on smog-forming pollutants, managing both kinds of emissions presents an interlocking puzzle for automakers.At times, Mr. Hatz could sound defeatist. “Perhaps we have just small Korean and Japanese cars in this country,” he said. “We have to be realistic.”And he was dismissive of the prospects for the big Detroit automakers. “I cannot see a way with their program that they can fulfill these regulations,” he said. “There’s no way.”At the time, California regulators, along with regulators in Washington, already had rules in place for emissions of nitrogen oxides and other smog-forming pollutants that were the toughest in the world, and California was also proposing to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from cars.While diesels have better fuel economy and, by extension, lower emissions of global warming gases, they have higher emissions of nitrogen oxides and other smog-forming pollutants that require special treatment systems. The company was plunged into an internal struggle about how to proceed.Wolfgang Bernhard, a former Daimler executive who ran the Volkswagen brand, had championed a technology-sharing agreement with Mercedes-Benz and BMW to jointly develop a system using urea, which neutralizes nitrogen oxides. Publicly, Mr. Hatz supported the technology, which Mercedes markets as Bluetec.“Bluetec technology allows us to demonstrate Audi’s commitment to always being at the very forefront of diesel technology,” he said in remarks at the Detroit auto show at the beginning of 2007. But internal friction within the company was already building. Mr. Bernhard unexpectedly did not attend that auto show, and soon resigned.Behind the scenes, Mr. Hatz was part of a faction at the company that supported using a less expensive system that did not require urea, according to two Volkswagen managers who were in a position to witness the clashes. The managers requested anonymity because they did not want to jeopardize their relationships with Volkswagen. Mr. Hatz’s viewpoint won out and the technology-sharing arrangement was soon scrapped.Though he was the executive ultimately responsible for engine development, it remains unclear if Mr. Hatz or executives above him were aware of or directed the cheating that took place.The central role of Mr. Hatz in the scandal raises questions about what Volkswagen’s former chief executive, Mr. Winterkorn, and its current chief, Matthias Müller, themselves knew or should have known. But both are detail-oriented engineers who worked closely with Mr. Hatz for years, first at Audi and then at its parent company, Volkswagen. Mr. Winterkorn was deeply involved in engine development, leading a steering committee aimed at charting how the company would meet future limits on carbon dioxide emissions. Mr. Hatz was a member of the committee.Mr. Müller was another top lieutenant of Mr. Winterkorn’s who was brought in from Audi; he became product planning chief of Volkswagen. After Mr. Müller was named to lead the Porsche division in 2010, he brought over Mr. Hatz to lead research and development.Both Mr. Winterkorn and Mr. Müller have denied knowing about the cheating that took place.Volkswagen said last week in explaining the emissions cheating that the less expensive diesel emissions technology it chose could not meet United States clean air requirements, but rather than scale back the company’s ambitions in the United States, some executives decided to cheat. Volkswagen did not name the executives, saying the evidence against them was not yet firm enough.“There was a tolerance for breaking the rules,” Hans-Dieter Pötsch, Volkswagen’s chairman, said at a news conference. “It proves not to have been a one-time error,” he said, “but rather a chain of errors that were allowed to happen.”