http://www.nytimes.com/2003/06/22/nyregion/on-politics-mcgreevey-s-ace-in-the-hole-turns-out-to-be-the-donald.html
ON POLITICS; McGreevey's Ace in the Hole Turns Out to Be the Donald - The New York Times
NEW JERSEY,ATLANTIC CITY (NJ),MCGREEVEY  JAMES E,TRUMP  DONALD,TAXATION,GAMBLING,CASINOS
June 22, 2003
7773
If you're an elected official struggling with lousy approval ratings, one of the most reliable ways to improve your poll numbers is to pick a high-profile fight with someone even more unpopular.So Governor McGreevey must have felt lucky indeed this year when New Jersey's fiscal problems allowed him to portray himself as David battling the Goliath of Atlantic City casinos.Trying to fill a projected budget shortfall of $5 billion, the governor proposed an assortment of increased taxes, including $135 million in new levies from casinos. The industry reacted with a furor, canceling construction projects, threatening layoffs and broadcasting radio ads that accused Mr. McGreevey of undermining the economic security of South Jersey.To the governor -- whose personal foibles and budget-related troubles are so protracted that a Quinnipiac University poll this month found that only 24 percent of the respondents want him re-elected -- the opportunity was simply too rich to resist.The Democratic State Committee began broadcasting response ads that featured the governor warning New Jerseyans that casino executives were trying to foist their tax bills off on middle-class families and the elderly. Even Republicans conceded that it was smart politics for Mr. McGreevey to cast himself as a the workingman's defender against a group of people who inspire almost as much mistrust as politicians: casino ownersUnfortunately for Mr. McGreevey, he wasn't able to hold that moral high ground for long. No sooner had the governor's ads begun to run than the administration and Democratic legislators made a series of policy decisions that left Mr. McGreevey accused of kowtowing to the one man who embodies all that is excessive about Atlantic City -- Donald Trump.Less than a week after the governor began broadcasting his ads, the Division of Gaming Enforcement abruptly stopped challenging the financially viability of Mr. Trump's three heavily leveraged casinos, which are up for relicensing this month. The state had hired an accounting firm to analyze the finances, but the decision to drop the challenge will now spare Mr. Trump the ordeal of defending his finances during the licensing process.Mr. Trump, never known for his discretion with the media, was soon quoted in newspapers throughout the state urging the casino industry association to stop running the anti-McGreevey radio ads and threatening to quit the group unless they did. Then last Sunday, the governor and Democratic lawmakers agreed on a budget proposal that would settle for $90 million in additional revenue from casinos, but base the tax on casino profits on a formula that many political strategists say will help Mr. Trump because two of his properties are losing money.The McGreevey administration contends that all of the decisions were sound policy. But those arguments have not stopped Republicans from accusing Mr. McGreevey of giving Mr. Trump a sweetheart deal. In fact, when the governor held a news conference on Thursday to outline his budget plan, there was an ominous presence in the back of the room: Senator William L. Gormley, a Republican of Atlantic County, who is the casino industry's most boisterous supporter.Once the governor finished his presentation, Mr. Gormley held an impromptu news conference and lambasted the casino tax plan as a boondoggle that would reward Mr. Trump for failing to turn a profit.''This is ludicrous policy because it will cost jobs,'' Mr. Gormley said. ''And it's terrible politics because they've given me a villain, Donald Trump.''Because casino taxes are one of the most bitter issues during this budget season, the McGreevey administration's actions have set off a variety of convoluted explanations. Some political strategists believe the governor was trying to split his adversaries in the casino industry and found a willing ally in Mr. Trump.Others suggest that Mr. Trump has leveraged his friendship with George Norcross III, the bank executive and Democratic Party power broker, into a favorable piece of legislation. (Mr. Trump says he did not take an active role in negotiating the casino tax plan; Mr. Norcross did not return phone calls requesting comment.)Whatever may have caused the administration's recent policy decisions regarding Mr. Trump and the rest of Atlantic City, its effect is to leave Mr. McGreevey with a newfound ally whose paltry standing in public opinion polls actually rival his own.For his part, Mr. Trump insists he never received favorable treatment and maintains that his prominence has actually brought him far more scrutiny than other casino executives."I get worse treatment because I'm Donald Trump," he said in a telephone interview last week.Perhaps. But it's doubtful the governor will be using that sound bite in his radio ads any time soon.