https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/23/your-money/tips-for-paying-off-student-loans.html
What to Do When It’s Time to Pay for All That Knowledge - The New York Times
Financial Aid (Education),Student Loans,Personal Finances,Colleges and Universities
May 22, 2015
3777
AFTER the mortarboards are thrown into the air comes the reality of student loan payments.More than 40 million Americans are repaying more than $1.2 trillion in outstanding student loan debt, according to the federal government.Most loans come with grace periods — a span of time before you must begin making monthly loan payments — of six to nine months, depending on the type of loan. It’s a good time to get organized and familiarize yourself with your loans, so that you don’t miss any payments and incur late fees.Mark Kantrowitz, publisher of Edvisors.com, a financial aid site, suggests making a list of your loans, including the amount owed, the name of the lender or servicer and the date the first payment is due. The site offers a free online checklist.If you are unsure about the details of your federal loans — the most common type of student loan, made or backed by the federal government — you can look them up on the Department of Education’s National Student Loan Data System. For details of loans from private lenders, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau suggests that you contact your school’s financial aid office or review your credit report.“Know when you have to make your first payment,” said Lauren Asher, co-founder of the Project on Student Debt at the Institute for College Access and Success. And make sure your loan servicer has your correct address and contact information. The most common reason for not getting a statement or coupon book on time is that you have moved and the information goes to the wrong place. But you are responsible for timely payments, even if you haven’t received a statement. So if your servicer lacks your current address, “it’s on you,” she said.You can also consider having payments automatically debited from your bank account.Automatic payments help ensure that you pay on time, avoiding potential late fees. And interest rate discounts are often available if you sign up for automatic debits.Here are some answers to questions about student loan repayment:■ Should I start making payments before the grace period ends?Making payments right away is sometimes tough to do, since after graduation you may need money for moving expenses, security deposits and a new wardrobe for the working world. But with some loans, like federal unsubsidized loans, interest accrues during the grace period and is added to the principal when you officially start repayment. So if you can afford it, it makes sense to start payments as soon as possible.■ Should I consolidate multiple student loans?Combining federal loans into a new, single loan may make managing your debt easier, since you will have just one payment to make.But be aware that doing so will typically shorten the grace period to no more than 60 days, Mr. Kantrowitz said. So if you are not ready to start making payments, “Don’t consolidate them until the end of the grace period,” he said. Consolidating can also remove certain benefits available with federal loans, according to the Department of Education, so make sure you understand the details first.There are other caveats. The formula used to set the new rate slightly increases the cost of the loans. And when the loans are pooled, you can’t target extra payments to pay down the loan with the highest rate first.If you have private loans, you may want to wait a few years after graduation before seeking to consolidate them, Mr. Kantrowitz said. Such loans take your credit score into account and young adults without much of a credit history tend to have lower scores. If you work for a while and build a solid credit history, he said, you may get a better rate when you consolidate.■ What if I can’t afford my student loan payments?If you have federal loans, you may be eligible for repayment options that lower your monthly payment to one that is more affordable, relative to your income. More information, including a tool that can help estimate payments under different plans, is available on the Department of Education website.Private loans typically offer fewer options, but you can still contact your loan servicer. Some lenders may allow extended repayment plans, which lower monthly payments but lengthen the term of the loan, or graduated plans, which start out with lower monthly payments that increase over time.If you are considering applying for an alternative repayment plan, “Start the process earlier rather than later,” said Andy Josuweit, chief executive of Student Loan Hero, an online site for managing student loans. It can take time to have the new plan approved, so you don’t want to wait until your payments are imminent.