https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/29/world/asia/china-xi-jinping-united-nations-general-assembly.html
Xi Jinping of China Calls for Cooperation and Partnerships in U.N. Speech   - The New York Times
International Relations,General Assembly (UN),Xi Jinping,Beijing (China)
Sept. 27, 2015
7477
UNITED NATIONS — President Xi Jinping of China called for the countries of the world to make “a new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation, and create a community of a shared future for mankind.”Speaking on Monday at the United Nations General Assembly, Mr. Xi stressed that all nations, “big, strong and rich should not bully the small, weak and poor,” and he called for the rejection of the “outdated mind-set that one’s gain means the other’s loss or winner takes all.”He said his vision of a new world order called for countries to seek “partnerships rather than alliances.”Mr. Xi also announced that China would contribute $1 billion to a new United Nations peace and development fund, which is intended to advance multilateral cooperation. He said that China would soon help set up a new, permanent peacekeeping squad of 8,000 for police missions, and would provide an additional $100 million to the African Union to establish a standby force intended to respond immediately to emergency crises on the continent.Repeating a long-standing approach to the United Nations, where China has emphasized multilateral solutions, Mr. Xi said that no country could maintain “absolute stability with its own efforts.”“Those who adopt the high-ended approach of using force will find they are only lifting a rock to drop on their own feet,” he said.Mr. Xi, who just completed a state visit to Washington and talks with President Obama, spoke at the General Assembly for the first time. Ahead of his appearance, his aides said that the speech would be an “inspirational” effort to lay out China’s vision for a more multipolar world, and was intended to outline his idea of China’s role in the world as it becomes richer and more powerful.To that end, Mr. Xi said that no matter how strong China became, “China will never pursue hegemony, expansion or spheres of influence.” This line seemed intended to allay the growing fears of China’s Asian neighbors who worry about Beijing’s increasing military strength.One of the themes of Mr. Xi’s visit to the United Nations is an effort to show that China is willing to shoulder more financial responsibility for United Nations work.Mr. Xi, who leads the country with the world’s largest carbon emissions, sounded a positive note on the environment, saying China would pursue “green, low carbon development.”“We should build an ecosystem that puts mother nature and green development first. We are after all part of nature,” Mr. Xi said. He urged countries to “reconcile industrial development and nature.”