https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/03/movies/kumail-nanjiani-silicon-valley-the-big-sick.html
Is the New Mr. Right an Immigrant Rom-Com Hero? - The New York Times
Movies,The Big Sick (Movie),Nanjiani  Kumail,Gordon  Emily V
May 3, 2017
9536
LOS ANGELES — Kumail Nanjiani loves ’90s romantic comedies, the mushier the better. “I started doing standup because of Hugh Grant’s best-man speech in ‘Four Weddings,’ which is basically a standup routine,” he said. For the aspiring comic, Mr. Grant was the gold standard of rom-com stars, although Mr. Nanjiani never dreamed of becoming one himself. “It just felt like the people who were making those things were, like, aliens, or gods,” he said.Next month, Mr. Nanjiani tackles the lead role in the romantic comedy “The Big Sick,” based on his own experiences meeting, dating and making a hash of things with his future wife, Emily V. Gordon, who wrote the script with him. Mr. Nanjiani, 39, plays a gently tweaked version of himself, a Pakistani-American standup comedian and Uber driver; Emily (Zoe Kazan) is a therapist-to-be who heckles him — in a flirty, endearing way — during one of his sets. The relationship seems doomed from the start, seeing as how Mr. Nanjiani’s family expects him to marry a nice Pakistani woman, a fact he somehow neglects to mention to his new girlfriend. When Emily becomes ill and is placed in a medically induced coma — again, from real life — things come to an unexpectedly funny head.Seeing a Pakistani-American comic secure the romantic lead in a Hollywood film would be a rare delight under any circumstances. But what makes “The Big Sick” all the more remarkable is how little fuss is made of it. In the film, we see Kumail and his family eating and laughing and goofing off, fighting and (after a spell) making up, just like the actor’s real family. It’s a vision of a Muslim family, Mr. Nanjiani notes, rarely seen in American film.“You just don’t see Muslims being matter-of-fact Muslim,” he said. “They’re always defined by their Muslim-ness. We’re either terrorists, or we’re fighting terrorists. I remember seeing ‘True Lies’ and going, why are we always the bad guys?”When Mr. Nanjiani and Ms. Gordon first began working on the film five years ago, they envisioned a personal yet relatable film inspired by improbable events. But then came the 2016 presidential election. Not only has Mr. Nanjiani since become known for his political views, taking to Twitter to criticize Mr. Trump’s abortive Muslim ban and making national news after a confrontation with Trump supporters, but audience reactions have also changed. In the Trump era, a simple tale about a Muslim immigrant falling in love with a girl in a coma is anything but.“When we started it, it was an important part of the movie, this experience of an immigrant in America,” said Judd Apatow, a producer of the movie. “What it’s turned into is an important representation that there are a billion people out there who are much closer to what we’re like than we are led to believe.”His fellow producer Barry Mendel noted, “Every day we made the film, we were under the impression that it would be released during President Hillary Clinton’s first term.”The filmmakers better understood how the new political climate affected their movie when early audiences got to the scene in which a young white man heckles Mr. Nanjiani in the middle of a comedy set. “Go back to ISIS,” the man yells, smirking. Playing Mr. Nanjiani’s future mother-in-law, Holly Hunter is having none of it; near fisticuffs ensue. “We had test screenings of the film before the election, and that scene played so differently,” Mr. Nanjiani said. “It played very funny, but now it’s almost a cathartic moment, like a howl of righteous rage. People used to laugh; now they laugh and clap.”The film, directed by Michael Showalter and also starring Ray Romano and the Bollywood actor Anupam Kher, received rave reviews after its Sundance debut in January. For Mr. Nanjiani, it’s a project marked by firsts: his first time playing a character so closely tied to his own life and experiences; his first dramatic lead in a feature film; his first romantic lead in, well, anything. Until now, he’s tackled ensemble roles on award-winning shows: Dinesh, the romantically-challenged software engineer tormented by Gilfoyle, a practicing Satanist, on “Silicon Valley” (HBO), and Prismo, an omnipotent wish-granter with a pinkish, 2-D body on “Adventure Time” (Cartoon Network). Before that, he played a series of much smaller roles. “I never decided I wanted to be an actor,” he said. “I just started doing standup because I love standup. Everything else has sort of been these tiny steps leading to this.”On a recent morning, Mr. Nanjiani and Ms. Gordon were at their home in the Los Feliz neighborhood of Los Angeles, discussing how the film came to be, and how much — or little — the story diverged from real life. In person, Mr. Nanjiani is better looking than his “Silicon Valley” character, with none of the computer-geek vibe; Ms. Gordon, funny and ebullient, with large blue eyes, seems like someone Dinesh might awkwardly pursue on the show, with little success. In conversation, the two back each other constantly (“I don’t disagree”) and often finish each other’s sentences; sometimes they’ll say the exact same thing in near unison.As Bagel, their affectionate gray cat, rubbed against our legs under the dinner table, the two talked about everything from the relative merits of Mr. Grant’s rom-coms (“Notting Hill” vs. “Four Weddings and a Funeral”) and Mr. Nanjiani’s encyclopedic knowledge of Sega Genesis video games (a staple of his childhood) to the couple’s first date. For that momentous event, Mr. Nanjiani chose a Chicago restaurant very close to where he was living at the time. “Always set up a date near your house, because then you can just go back to your house after,” Ms. Gordon said. “It’s like, ‘Oh my God, look! We’re so close.’”“It’s a good move,” Mr. Nanjiani agreed.Mr. Nanjiani came to the United States from Pakistan when he was 18 to go to college in Iowa; his family followed. He began working on what would become “The Big Sick” in 2012, after running into Mr. Apatow at South by Southwest. The two had worked together before, on “The Five-Year Engagement,” and the prolific producer invited Mr. Nanjiani to pitch story ideas to him and Mr. Mendel, who had collaborated on unconventional romantic comedies like “Bridesmaids” and “Trainwreck.” Mr. Nanjiani immediately thought about how he had met Ms. Gordon, even though a central moment in that story — Ms. Gordon’s coma, which stretched on for eight days — didn’t necessarily seem rich comedic fodder.Mr. Nanjiani began work on a first draft and asked Ms. Gordon, a former therapist turned writer-producer, for notes and suggestions; before long, the two were writing the script together. “Right from the beginning, it was like, how do you make a movie about someone in a coma funny?” he said.Ms. Gordon added, “I didn’t want the joke to be like, ‘Oh, I accidentally unplugged her. Uh-oh!’ If it’s going to be that level of humor, I’m out.”There were rewrites and more rewrites, three years’ worth; not so unusual by Apatow standards, but something new for Mr. Nanjiani and Ms. Gordon. “We would write a draft, and Judd would tear it to shreds,” Ms. Gordon said. After their first screening tested high, Mr. Apatow came to the two with one more request: Add 50 more jokes.“We knew there were challenges in telling a story like this, but once we saw the story worked, we knew we could get a little more experimental,” Mr. Apatow said, also noting, “It really had to be the perfect script to try to get funding.”There was also the matter of how to make the story dramatically compelling. In real life, there was a lot of sitting and waiting and worrying, but how thrilling is that? “If we showed what actually happened, you would just see people going through a stressful event being very kind to each other,” Ms. Gordon said.Instead, Ms. Hunter and Mr. Romano play her parents as temperamental opposites — she’s a feisty Southerner, he’s a laid-back guy from New York — who enter the film with their own nettlesome back story. (Ms. Gordon said her parents “want me to mention this always: My dad has not cheated on my mom, ever.”)Though a fictional heckler is the catalyst for the film’s ISIS confrontation, the actor has experienced similar run-ins onstage, about seven or eight times, by his count. “It used to be ‘Go back to Taliban,’” he said. “Now it’s ‘Go back to ISIS.’ That’s about the only thing they’ve really updated.”Last November, he and his “Silicon Valley” co-star Thomas Middleditch found themselves in a similar altercation in a bar in Silver Lake, Los Angeles. Two men approached them and told them that they were big fans, but that the two actors were, as Mr. Nanjiani recalled, “off base about Trump.” When he and Mr. Middleditch said that they didn’t want to discuss politics, the “fans” started yelling at them, calling them “cucks.” The incident blew up online after both actors tweeted about it. “It made me a little sad to see these guys go from really happy to meet us to really angry, so quick,” Mr. Nanjiani said.“I didn’t feel scared, or physically threatened, because I was like, and this is probably not the right approach, but I felt if we had to, we could have taken these guys,” he added.This year is a busy one for Mr. Nanjiani. In addition to starring in “Sick,” he recently appeared in the Ice Cube comedy “Fist Fight” and has a role in the coming “Lego Ninjago Movie.” On “Silicon Valley,” which began its fourth season last month, his character, Dinesh, has several groundbreaking moments, including a brief taste of venture capital-backed power and a date with an actual girl.“As an actor, I think this is just the tip of the iceberg in terms of what he can do,” Ms. Kazan said.Work promotions, romance, ninja battles — it’s all a far cry from Mr. Nanjiani’s past gigs, which included roles as a counter guy, a custodian and an airport security guard.“You never got cabdriver parts,” Ms. Gordon said, “but you went out for cabdriver parts.”He said: “The thing that helped me, I guess, was that I wasn’t physically intimidating, so I never had to play terrorists.”“You would have been adorable,” Ms. Gordon observed.“I know a lot of brown actors who play terrorists because they’re physically intimidating. For me, it was like, ‘O.K., you’ll be the nerd.’ So I’ve played the nerd. I’ve played food-delivery guys. But I always tried to find something in the characters so that they weren’t just defined by what they looked like.”