https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/13/travel/ski-holidays-aspen-vermont-italy.html
Ski Holidays for the True Novice - The New York Times
Travel and Vacations,Skiing,Spas,Aspen (Colo),Italy
Dec. 7, 2015
7958
From Aspen Snowmass in Colorado to Valtournenche in Italy, there are thousands of ski resorts, which can make the act of choosing one a daunting prospect for novice skiers and snowboarders. Many places have a few easy trails, but where might a beginner feel truly comfortable? Below is a smattering of places in the United States, Canada, Europe and South America where neophytes will find gentle trails, group and private lessons, and diversions other than skiing for those times when you want to trade the slopes for skates, sleds, a spa or a wineglass.When exploring resorts online, keep in mind that many of them have a section of their website with information about the mountain or mountains. There, sometimes under a tab that says “statistics,” “facts” or “terrain,” you can see what percentage of the trails are for beginners versus intermediate and advanced skiers. You can also view the trail maps.Aspen Snowmass. Four mountains make up this Colorado ski resort, though beginners are known to flock to Buttermilk Mountain, where about 35 percent of the trails are easy. (Aspen Mountain, in contrast, has no easy trails.) While the ESPN Winter X Games have been held at Buttermilk, it nevertheless has plenty of gentle terrain and is home to S3 Park, where aspiring snowboarders can learn the basics. Private skiing and snowboarding lessons (starting at $550 for a half day; $780 for a full day) and group lessons are available, including classes for the youngest beginners (ages 2½ to 4; $210 a day for tickets seven days in advance), and full-day adult classes ($220 a day for tickets seven days in advance).Just as important, there’s no shortage of things to do in Aspen and Snowmass Village when you need a break: snowshoeing, snow tubing, snow biking, yoga, indoor and outdoor dining, a thriving après ski scene, live music and nighttime bonfires with s’mores and hot chocolate. Not every resort has as many off-hill offerings. Information: Aspensnowmass.com.Big White Ski Resort. British Columbia hardly lacks for ski resorts. Whistler Blackcomb ski resort is, of course, the one to beat thanks to its more than 8,000 acres of terrain, including alpine views, and a vibrant night life at village lounges and restaurants. But while there are trails and lessons for beginners, most runs are for intermediate and advanced skiers and snowboarders (after all, Whistler was the home of the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games). Big White, a smaller option near Kelowna, B.C., may be preferable for novices who want a more low-key experience. It’s smaller, and for the vertical averse, Big White also has more than 15 miles of Nordic and wilderness trails for cross-country skiing and snowshoeing. Lessons for adults begin at $59 for a two-hour group class; half-day private classes begin at $255 for the first three people. There are horse-drawn sleigh rides, snowmobile tours, tubing and day spas, too. Information: Bigwhite.com.Courchèvel. Billing itself as one of the largest interconnected ski areas in the world, this French resort sprawls across three valleys with 93 miles of runs and views of Mont Blanc, La Grande Casse and Les Écrins. You might think such vistas would be accessible only to experienced skiers, but Courchèvel characterizes 50 percent of its runs as easy. Beginners can also take refuge in ZEN areas, or Zones for the Evolution of Novices: wide open, gentle hills where they can practice the basics and gain confidence. The resort, in the Three Valleys ski area, also has Magic Carpet lifts — the conveyor belts that whisk inexperienced skiers to the tops of hills as if they’re suitcases at an airport. Off the slopes you can unwind at a spa, piano bar, nightclub or restaurant. Information: Courchevel.com.Deer Valley Resort. Learning to ski can be rough. For those who want to be pampered between the twists, turns and inevitable falls, there’s Deer Valley in Park City, Utah. Known for its high-end service, it is the sort of place that offers tissues on the lift lines and has attendants to help guests load and unload their equipment. The St. Regis Deer Valley there has ski-in, ski-out access, and a spa and an outdoor heated pool along with hot tubs for year-round use. Naturally, you can order food to be delivered poolside. The nearby Utah Olympic Park has bobsled rides on the Olympic track and other diversions, including the Eccles 2002 Olympic Winter Games Museum. (Note: There’s no snowboarding at Deer Valley.) Information: Deervalley.com.Stratton Mountain Ski Resort. Among Vermont’s biggest draws is Killington resort, which has nearly 2,000 skiable acres, including Pico Mountain. Stratton, however, is less than half the size and ideal for beginners: More than 40 percent of its trails are for novices. While hardly as large as Killington, there are still other things to do, including snow tubing, snowshoeing, cross-country skiing and listening to live music. Information: Stratton.com.Valle Nevado. This popular Chilean resort in the Andes expanded its offerings for beginners a couple of years ago. Today there are additional trails for adult beginners (with Magic Carpet lifts), as well as a nascent snow school where adults can take classes in a separate area. Beginner snowboarders can take lessons as well. Information: Vallenevado.com/en.Valtournenche. This Northern Italian ski area is connected to Breuil-Cervinia in the Italian Alps and to Zermatt in the Swiss Alps, one of the highest resorts in Europe, with views of the Matterhorn. Zermatt is beautiful but has more challenging runs. Most of the runs at Valtournenche, on the other hand, are easy. Novices will find gentle slopes in a laid-back atmosphere, yet can still have access to Zermatt thanks to certain ski passes that can also be used there. Information: Cervinia.it.Yellowstone National Park. Why not learn to ski while gliding past waterfalls, geysers, hot springs and bison in the country’s first national park? Those interested in cross-country skiing will find some easy trails by the Northeast, Tower, Mammoth and Old Faithful areas. Group and private lessons that won’t break the bank are available at the Bear Den ski shops at park lodges such as Old Faithful Snow Lodge and Mammoth Hot Springs ($26 for a two-hour group lesson; $30 an hour for private lessons booked in advance). Information: Yellowstonenationalparklodges.com.