https://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/29/opinion/sunday/no-cheer-for-the-jobless.html
No Cheer for the Jobless - The New York Times
Unemployment Insurance,Federal Aid (US),United States Politics and Government,Democratic Party,Republican Party,House of Representatives,Editorials
Dec. 28, 2013
8899
The House Republicans who refused to renew expiring federal jobless benefits before leaving Washington for an extended Christmas break have shown no inclination to revisit the issue when they return to work in January. This is unconscionable. In each of the previous seven major recessions, dating back to 1958, Congress has never let federal benefits expire when the need has been as great as it is today. And for good reason. Prematurely ending benefits inflicts needless harm on families — the average benefit is about $270 a week — as well as avoidable damage on the economy by denting essential spending.The expiration of the federal benefit program this weekend means that 1.3 million people who had been receiving assistance will be cut off this week. In the first half of 2014, another estimated 1.9 million people who would otherwise have qualified for federal benefits will find that there is no federal program to turn to. By the second half of 2014, that tally will rise by another 1.6 million people.There is a common misperception that renewing federal benefits means providing jobless aid indefinitely. That is not how it works. Federal benefits kick in when state benefits run out, generally after 26 weeks. The duration of federal benefits depends mainly on a state’s jobless rate. In most states, federal benefits last for either 14 weeks, or 20 to 28 weeks. Recently, the average duration was 29 weeks, a figure that is elevated by states with very high joblessness. Illinois, Nevada and Rhode Island, for example, qualify for the federal maximum of up to 47 weeks.Another misperception is that ending benefits will help to end unemployment. In that scenario, Republicans see themselves as practicing tough love, jolting dependents into finding jobs. That also is not how it works. Long-term unemployment is high because there are not enough jobs, not because millions of Americans have suddenly lost their work ethic. At last count, there were still nearly three unemployed people for every job opening; in a healthy economy, the ratio is about one to one. At last count, the average spell of unemployment was 37.2 weeks, nearly 20 weeks longer than the prerecession level. And as demonstrated in North Carolina, which has cut state jobless benefits and effectively rejected federal benefits, slashing aid has led not to more jobs but to despair.Congressional Democrats and some Republicans have said they will try to reinstate federal jobless benefits when Congress returns. If they don’t succeed, miserliness will be the prevailing public policy.