http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/15/movies/15clon.html
An Animated Force - The New York Times
Motion Pictures,Star Wars: The Clone Wars (Movie),Lucas  George
Aug. 14, 2008
6633
Expectations were set so low by George Lucas’s lousy trilogy of “Star Wars” prequels that the latest from the Lucasfilm factory, a feature-length digital animation called “Star Wars: The Clone Wars,” comes as something of a surprise: it isn’t the most painful movie of the year!Set between Episodes II and III, this new “Star Wars” saga (II.5?) completes the franchise’s divorce from photography-based cinema, as well as from any relationship to credible human feeling.As a mechanical thrill ride, however, “The Clone Wars” has an uncluttered look and furious pace that make it more or less as satisfying as its wildly overdesigned predecessors, although it’s neither as agile nor as well made as the terrific series of short, traditionally animated “Clone Wars” installments shown on the Cartoon Network from 2003 to 2005.The director, Dave Filoni, has cited “Thunderbirds,” the 1960s British animation series with marionettes, as an inspiration for the, uh, wooden style of his picture, but the stiff, self-important characterizations; corny space-war talk; and overheated militarism kept reminding me of “Team America: World Police.”No more than a pretext for exploding robots and light-saber duels, the plot concerns the efforts of Anakin Skywalker and Ahsoka Tano, his neophyte sidekick, to secure a fragile alliance by retrieving Jabba the Hutt’s baby son from the double-crossing clutches of Count Dooku, blah, blah, blah. Exploding robots!“Star Wars: The Clone Wars” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for bloodless sci-fi mayhem. STAR WARSThe Clone WarsOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Dave Filoni; written by Henry Gilroy, Steven Melching and Scott Murphy; animation directors, Jesse Yeh and Kevin Jong; edited by Jason W. A. Tucker; music by Kevin Kiner, with original “Star Wars” themes and scores by John Williams; produced by Catherine Winder; released by Warner Brothers Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 35 minutes.WITH THE VOICES OF: Matt Lanter (Anakin Skywalker), Ashley Eckstein (Ahsoka Tano), James Arnold Taylor (Obi-Wan Kenobi), Dee Bradley Baker (Captain Rex/Clone Troopers), Tom Kane (Yoda), Nika Futterman (Asajj Ventress), Ian Abercrombie (Chancellor Palpatine), Coey Burton (Ziro the Hutt), Catherine Taber (Padme Amidala), Anthony Daniels (C-3PO), Christopher Lee (Count Dooku) and Samuel L. Jackson (Mace Windu).