http://www.nytimes.com/2006/11/21/arts/21iht-trump.3611735.html
Trump Jr.: Finally trading on a famous name - Culture - International Herald Tribune - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
Nov. 21, 2006
3666
NEW YORK — On Tuesday, just two days after their first wedding anniversary, a couple in their 20s invited a small group of friends and relatives to their two-bedroom condominium on the Upper West Side.After clinking glasses, they made an announcement that caught the husband's male friends off guard but surprised few of the wife's female friends. Yes, they were expecting, in the spring, their first.That was Donald John Trump Jr. and Vanessa Trump doing things the normal way.The next night, Donald Trump Jr., dressed in a pinstripe suit, stood before the cameras in a crowd of models and second-generation New York social personalities at a cocktail party at a Manhattan art gallery to celebrate his wife's appearance on the cover of Hamptons magazine.As he forecast the joys and challenges of fatherhood, reporters attempted to calibrate, by the size of the bump beneath the belly of Vanessa Trump's teal Issa London gown, how long the world would have to wait for a new playmate for Barron, the 8-month-old son of Melania and Donald Trump Sr.That was Donald Trump Jr. and Vanessa Trump doing things the Trump way.After 28 years hidden in the glare of his high-wattage father, the junior Donald Trump, it appears, is finally ready to live up to the famous name that is both a banner and a target. With a rising profile within the family business, a model wife who is building the couple's presence on the New York social circuit, a major new role in the upcoming season of "The Apprentice" reality television series and, yes, a new Trump heir on the way, Donald Trump Jr. is finally one half of a boldface couple, a personality. A budding star? Perhaps. But at the very least, a Trump.This is no small concern in a family business where celebrity, as much as real estate, is the lifeblood. It is celebrity that transforms ordinary vodka into Trump vodka, bottled spring water into Trump Ice, and glassy high- rises into symbols of gilded big-city aspiration.Until recently, the younger Trump said, he had always avoided publicity, "because otherwise, I'm just Donald Trump's son, some little rich kid running around.""But when I started working," he said, "I realized that there's an end goal, that I can use some of this. It would be like having an advantage and not taking advantage of it. That's called stupid."He spoke on a recent afternoon in his cramped office on the 26th floor of Trump Tower, down the hallway from his father. It is 40 stories below the penthouse apartment where he spent much of his childhood with his siblings Ivanka and Eric.For five years, he has spent some 14 hours a day there as executive vice president for development and acquisitions - the original apprentice, basically.But until recently, someone could live in Trump World Tower, wear a Donald J. Trump Signature Collection suit, and spritz himself with Donald Trump: The Fragrance cologne without knowing there was a Donald Jr.An Ivanka, yes. Don Jr.'s pouty-lipped sister, now 25, has been famous since she began modeling in her teens, and she lately has been reported to be dating the actor Topher Grace. She has been working in the family business for a year and a half.Donald Trump Jr. generally stayed in the shadows, like the youngest of Donald and Ivana Trump's children, Eric, 22, who graduated from Georgetown University in May and began working in the Trump Organization a few months ago. (Donald Sr. also has a daughter by Marla Maples, Tiffany, who is 13.)"Don is just a down-to-earth person," said Dee Dee Sides, a friend. "I think the thought just never crossed his mind that he was going to have to be more visible because of the nature of the family company."In fact, their childhoods were oddly normal, Eric Trump recalled. The eldest sibling, he said, held a certain authority over the two younger kids."Donnie's always been my best friend, a mentor," Eric Trump said."In a way, he raised me. My father, I love and I appreciate, but he always worked 24 hours a day."Unlike Ivanka and Eric, Don Jr. was old enough to follow the tabloid headlines that surrounded his parents' separation in 1990 and his father's financial implosion soon after. "Sometimes being a Trump," he acknowledged, "everyone kind of wants to see you fail."But as he is increasingly making clear, the Trump taste for publicity eventually asserts itself."The patrimony of Donald Trump is publicity, maybe more than anything else," said David Patrick Columbia, the editor of the Web site New York Social Diary, recalling that Donald and Ivana Trump labored to make themselves a franchise on the New York social scene before they became one for the world.The younger Trumps, Columbia added, "don't push themselves on anybody or anything, but they are working their way into the community in a very stable way."As a newly minted Trump, Vanessa Haydon Trump seems born for the role. She grew up in a town house on the Upper East Side, has been modeling since childhood and is signed to Wilhelmina. Her mother, Bonnie Haydon, ran the Kay Models agency.As a student and tennis star at the Dwight School on the Upper West Side, Vanessa - who has an athletic build, buttery tan, blond hair and sunny smile  - joked a lot and usually wore jeans, said Shawn Modell, a lifelong friend. Vanessa focused her attentions on an intimate circle of friends, not on social advancement.In fact, years later, she did not have to take any particular strides to marry rich. Donald Trump Sr. took care of that."I'm at this fashion show," Vanessa Trump said, recalling their meeting in 2003. "Donald Trump comes up to me with his son: 'Hi, I'm Donald Trump. I wanted to introduce you to my son Donald Trump Jr.'"The three engaged in a brief, awkward conversation.At intermission, the elder Trump again noticed a gorgeous girl nearby."Donald comes back up to me again, 'I don't think you've met my son Donald Trump Jr.,'" Vanessa Trump recalled. She remembers responding, "Yeah, we just met, five minutes ago."Six weeks later, at a birthday party at a New York restaurant, they were introduced a third time, this time by a mutual friend. Neither remembered the other. "We talked for an hour," she recalled.Then suddenly, something clicked: Wait, you were at that fashion show. Wait, you're "the one with the retarded dad!" Vanessa blurted out.On Nov. 12, 2005, they married at Mar- a-Lago, the family's club in Florida. (Donald Trump Sr. had taken his son to task on "Larry King Live" for accepting a free engagement ring from a jeweler at a mall in New Jersey in exchange for publicly announcing his engagement there. "You have a name that is hot as a pistol, you have to be very careful with things like this," the elder Trump told King.)The bride, who had been active on the charity circuit for years, was soon hauling her husband out to fashion shows and benefits, and the two began popping up in gossip and society columns. Observers on the circuit could hardly help but notice the similarity between the senior and junior Trumps. Both have a muscular top-heavy build - Don Jr. rowed crew while an undergraduate at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. They share an anvil-shape chin they tend to thrust upward for cameras. (But, yes, Don has better hair).But while the Queens-bred Donald Sr. is jackhammer-intense and almost smothering in his charisma, Donald Jr. is lighter in spirit. He laughs easily and often.Charm, of course, is a crucial asset for any member of the family, said Peter Hauspurg, the chairman of Eastern Consolidated Properties, a Manhattan real estate investment firm. "Others are using celebrities to sell their business," Hauspurg said. But Donald Sr., he noted, is "his own celebrity."It is that celebrity status that helps drive condominiums in Trump buildings to sell at a premium. In New York, condominiums flying the Trump name sold at a 36 percent premium over comparable properties in 2005, according to statistics compiled by the Corcoran Group.The fame of the scion likely will only grow this January, when the eldest son and his sister replace their father's television co-stars, George Ross and Carolyn Kepcher."It's an hour-long infomercial," Don Jr. said of "The Apprentice." "People pay millions of dollars for a 30-second advertisement, we get to be on it for a full hour promoting all our projects." Still, certain factors may at least slow the couple's social ascent over the next year - parenthood, for one."I can build buildings all day long," Donald Jr. said. "This is something that will actually faze me."