http://www.nytimes.com/2006/04/20/world/asia/20cnd-hu.html
China's Leader Makes First White House Visit - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
April 20, 2006
6300
WASHINGTON, April 20 — President Bush and President Hu Jintao of China, meeting for the first time at the White House today, pledged closer cooperation on fighting nuclear proliferation and addressing their massive trade imbalance. But they broke little new ground on a host of disputes that have strained the relationship between the countries in recent years.The meeting, which required more than a year of intensive diplomacy to arrange and was postponed by Hurricane Katrina, did more to emphasize the long list of tensions between the world's richest country and its fastest-rising rival than it did to offer fresh solutions. The two presidents did not announce any new agreements after their 90-minute meeting in the Oval Office.A carefully choreographed welcome ceremony for Mr. Hu on the South Lawn was interrupted by an activist of the Falun Gong religious sect who managed to join the event as a reporter for the organization's United States-based newspaper, Epoch Times.The protester screamed about China's persecution of Falun Gong practitioners and partially drowned out Mr. Hu during his opening remarks before security officers managed to remove her from a press podium, leaving Mr. Bush, standing side-by-side with Mr. Hu, visibly angered.Later, meeting Mr. Hu in the Oval Office, Mr. Bush appeared to exert most of his pressure on China on nuclear proliferation, pressing Mr. Hu to use leverage on North Korean leaders to abandon their nuclear bombs and asking Beijing to join the United States and European countries in imposing United Nations sanctions on Iran if needed to curtail that country's weapons program.Mr. Bush said he had raised the possibility of the Security Council passing a motion against Iran under chapter seven of the United Nations charter. That would allow action ranging from economic sanctions to military strikes and has been repeatedly rejected by the Chinese as an unnecessary escalation of the Iranian standoff.Mr. Bush said that a chapter seven motion was "one of the tactics" he had raised with Mr. Hu and that he hoped that Mr. Hu would join him in sending a message that the international community is "concerned about the Iranian ambition."China has spoken out repeatedly against United Nations sanctions on Iran, and Mr. Hu said little about the matter beyond reiterating the standard Chinese line about encouraging dialogue and seeking a peaceful solution."Both sides agreed to continue their effort to seek a peaceful resolution," Mr. Hu said after the meeting.He also defended China's actions in handling North Korea, its Stalinist neighbor, and studiously avoided taking sides in the matter or criticizing Pyongyang, which has boycotted disarmament talks for months after pledging to dismantle its nuclear weapons last fall."The six-party talks have run into some difficulties at the moment," Mr. Hu said. "I hope the parties will be able to further display flexibility, work together and create necessary conditions for the early resumption of talks."In response to a statement by Mr. Bush that there should be a peaceful resolution of the longstanding question of Taiwan's independence, Mr. Hu said that China would make "every effort" to do so but added that Taiwan was an "inalienable part of the Chinese territory." He said China would "never allow anyone to make China secede from China by any means."Mr. Hu appeared to be more accommodating on economic issues, pledging to stimulate domestic demand in China, reduce reliance on exports to drive growth, and move steadily toward a market-based exchange rate for its currency, the renminbi, to help address American concerns about China's huge bilateral trade surplus with Washington.But while he sounded accommodating to American demands, he did not reveal any timetable for allowing the currency to appreciate faster, disappointing some administration officials and members of Congress who had hoped to see more assertive action.The day got off to a rocky start when the heckler interrupted Mr. Hu, shouting at him from a platform where news photographers were covering the event.The Asian woman shouted in Chinese, but also broke into English, yelling "Stop the torture and killings!" and shouting the name of the Falun Gong, a religious and exercise sect that is outlawed in China. "Falun Dafa is good," she yelled.Mr. Hu looked at first confused and then hesitated before continuing to speak."You're O.K., " Mr. Bush said to him in a low voice, prodding him on.For at least a minute, the protests punctuated both Mr. Hu's remarks and the gaps in which he fell silent as his words were being translated into English.Eventually, security officials made their way to the top of the camera stand and led the heckler away as some photographers turned their cameras from the two leaders and pointed them at her.Chinese authorities consider the Falun Gong a major threat to national security and have outlawed the group. Members of the sect are regularly interned in camps without being tried.Supporters of the movement also protested Mr. Hu's visit in Washington state on Tuesday, using sound trucks to blast messages into his hotel that accused China's internal security forces of torture, organ harvesting and other atrocities. They also appeared near the headquarters of Microsoft, which hosted Mr. Hu during his visit. He also visited Boeing.