http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/22/theater/andrew-lloyd-webber-lord-baron-rocker.html
Andrew Lloyd Webber: Lord, Baron, Rocker - The New York Times
Lloyd Webber  Andrew,Theater,Rock Music,Music,School of Rock (Movie),Black  Jack,Brightman  Alex (Actor),School of Rock (Play)
Nov. 17, 2015
6517
At a recent rehearsal for his new Broadway musical, “School of Rock,” Andrew Lloyd Webber came striding down the aisle of the Winter Garden Theater and onto its stage. He was there to give adjustments to a quartet of adolescent musicians playing a tweenage heavy-metal band in this adaptation of the 2003 Jack Black comedy.But mostly, he wanted to talk about the third movement of Prokofiev’s Piano Sonata No. 7.Surrounded by the young actors, who earlier were making finger-guns at one another and debating the meaning of the pop song “Pumped Up Kicks,” Mr. Lloyd Webber, the composer and musical-theater impresario, began scat-singing the frantic rhythm of the Prokofiev piece — “da-da-da — da — da” — then asked them to guess its time signature.“Is that in five?” asked Brandon Niederauer, a floppy-haired, 12-year-old guitarist.In a proud, pedagogical voice, Mr. Lloyd Webber answered: “Seven.”As he stepped off the stage and headed to the soundboard at the theater’s rear, he explained that the Prokofiev sonata was “the best work of 7/8 time ever — it’s pure rock.”At a glance, Mr. Lloyd Webber, 67, might be the least likely person to produce and compose a musical about pent-up prep-schoolers who learn to stick it to the man from an unorthodox substitute teacher.While he may be the composer of such enduring (if not exactly headbanging) musicals as “Cats,” “Evita” and “The Phantom of the Opera,” he is also, in his native Britain, a lord and a baron, with an estimated net worth of nearly $1 billion. He has been productive, but it has been more than a decade since he’s had a new work open on Broadway, let alone succeed there.Perhaps he is too button-down, too unfamiliar with contemporary tastes and too much a part of the establishment to truly get inside a film (and now a show) whose lyrics declare, “You’re not hard-core/Unless you live hard-core.”But on closer inspection, maybe Mr. Lloyd Webber, who helped legitimize rock musicals with “Jesus Christ Superstar” and “Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat,” is distinctively qualified to tell a tale of how guitar riffs and drumbeats can be a language of liberation for frustrated artists.Maybe the inherent goofiness of “School of Rock” (which is in previews, and opens Dec. 6) is just what he needed to shed his self-consciousness and reconnect with the music of crazy trains and purple haze.As Mr. Lloyd Webber said of the $16 million show: “I haven’t written a score that’s going to change the Western world or the musical as we presently know it. But I just hope it’s fun.”Drinking coffee in an upstairs lounge at the Winter Garden on a Friday evening, Mr. Lloyd Webber had flown in from London a few hours earlier. While there, he had cast a rare vote in the House of Lords that would have helped advance a plan to cut tax credits for workers in low-paying jobs and for people with children. (The plan was blocked anyway; Mr. Lloyd Webber has said he was voting to prevent the House of Lords from overruling the House of Commons.)Here he was clothed casually, as he often is, wearing a dress shirt with a couple of open buttons, jeans and sneakers, and he spoke in a polite but halting manner, occasionally referring to himself in the third person. (“One would be lying if one didn’t say that one had melodies that I keep in my back pocket.”)He does not neatly fit the definition of a British noble or a popular composer, and no one is more aware of this than he is. Going back to his youth, Mr. Lloyd Webber said, “I was an odd animal, really.”He grew up loving the musicals of Rodgers and Hammerstein and knowing “South Pacific” practically by heart. His father, William, was the director of the London College of Music, but he also sneaked young Andrew into a movie theater to see Elvis Presley’s “Jailhouse Rock” and taught him a valuable lesson about personal taste.“He really did believe there were only two kinds of music,” Mr. Lloyd Webber said. “Good and bad.”Another formative influence was the British TV series “Oh Boy!,” where he watched emerging talents like Cliff Richard and Brenda Lee perform at London’s ramshackle Hackney Empire music hall.“What that did for me, at that impressionable age, was make theater and rock ’n’ roll indistinguishable,” Mr. Lloyd Webber said. “I just thought rock was about theater, and rather old variety theater, at that.”Years later, he and Tim Rice recorded the original 1970 concept album for “Jesus Christ Superstar” — hailed, in its own time, as revolutionary and denounced as sacrilegious — at London’s Olympic Studios, next door to Led Zeppelin.And they got their own taste of pop stardom the following year, when they traveled to New York for its Broadway debut.But Mr. Lloyd Webber recalls his first viewing of that show, produced by Robert Stigwood and directed by Tom O’Horgan, as “the worst day of my life.” The production was too ornate and too glitzy by his reckoning, and he was powerless to stop it.“What can you do if you’re 23 years old?” Mr. Lloyd Webber said.Four decades later, Mr. Lloyd Webber and his company, the Really Useful Group, allow no such leeway with their worldwide productions of “Phantom,” “Superstar” and “Cats,” which was recently revived on the West End and is being eyed for a Broadway return.He has also had a string of misfires, like “The Woman in White,” a period mystery that ran barely 100 performances on Broadway in 2005-6, and “Love Never Dies,” his coolly received “Phantom” sequel, which has played widely around the world but has yet to set foot in New York.But he is feeling revitalized following some recent health concerns. He said that he had recovered from prostate cancer, after having announced in 2009 that he had it, and that he was no longer beleaguered by back problems that he said were resolved by a chiropractor just before he was to undergo surgery.“Two pieces of advice for young composers,” Mr. Lloyd Webber said. “Go away during technical rehearsals. And do not have a back operation.”Now he can more easily focus on his work and find time, as he did a few weeks ago, to hit the London clubs to see new artists like Lauren Aquilina, a singer-songwriter whom his son Alastair Lloyd Webber helped to sign to Island Records.“If he hears about a hot show, he’ll be there,” said Alastair, 23, a junior A&R manager at that label.At his father’s age, Alastair said, “you would think most people have sat back, drinking tea somewhere. But he’s out there, trying to find the next thing.”Alastair said that as a child, his father turned him on to bands like the Beatles, Led Zeppelin and the Clash, as well as composers like Prokofiev and Shostakovich.The movie “School of Rock,” written by Mike White and directed by Richard Linklater, was also played frequently in the Lloyd Webber household, with Alastair estimating that he has watched it “about 40 times.”For several years, Andrew Lloyd Webber and his wife, Madeleine Gurdon, sought the stage rights to the film, thinking he could perhaps produce it as a jukebox musical, using existing rock hits and the handful of original numbers that Mr. Black performs in the movie.“It’s a primal tale,” Mr. Lloyd Webber said of its story, in which Mr. Black played Dewey Finn, a good-natured slob with dreams of rock stardom.But as Laurence Connor, the musical’s director recalled, when they looked closer at the film, “We went, ‘Actually, there aren’t any songs — there’s just the odd little bit of music here and there.’”Mr. Connor, a director of Broadway’s “Les Misérables” revival as well as touring productions of “Phantom” and “Superstar,” said, “We needed drama-based songs to tell the story, the way that a musical works” — and suddenly there was only one obvious candidate to compose them.Glenn Slater, the “School of Rock” lyricist, said he thought Mr. Lloyd Webber “had a little more self-doubt” as he decided between writing in the mode of 1960s classic rock or 1970s heavy metal.Mr. Slater, who also worked on “Love Never Dies,” said that he suggested to Mr. Lloyd Webber, “We should think of it like Meat Loaf or Jim Steinman: huge, operatic, over-the-top rock.”At that point, Mr. Slater said, “He perked up and said, ‘Oh, I’ve worked with Jim Steinman.’” (Together they wrote the musical “Whistle Down the Wind.”)“He just said, ‘I know where to go with this,’” Mr. Slater recalled. “‘I know what I’m doing.’”Adding to the unusual pedigree of the show, its book writer is Julian Fellowes, the creator of “Downton Abbey” and screenwriter of “Gosford Park.”While that might seem like more credentials than “School of Rock” needs, Mr. Fellowes said it allowed them to protect the project’s intimacy and keep outside interference to a minimum.“This is very much a show that four people came up with,” said Mr. Fellowes, who also wrote the book for the “Mary Poppins” musical that ran almost seven years on Broadway. “It’s much easier to preserve a distinctive vision if you haven’t got a whole committee.”That freedom seems to have awakened the slumbering rock star inside Mr. Lloyd Webber, who contributed songs like “You’re in the Band,” a number in which Dewey helps his formally trained students unlock their hidden potential.It can be read as an ode to Mr. Lloyd Webber’s rock ’n’ roll coming-of-age, containing snippets of the Rolling Stones’ “(I Can’t Get No) Satisfaction” (an inescapable radio hit from his adolescence); Deep Purple’s “Smoke on the Water” (a nod to that band’s lead singer, Ian Gillan, the original Jesus of “Superstar”); and “Walk on the Wild Side,” by Lou Reed (whose music was ubiquitous on his early visits to New York).Looking solely at the show’s creative team, Mr. Slater acknowledged, “Certainly, from a socio-economic standpoint, this is not the most obvious group to make ‘School of Rock — The Musical.’”But thematically, Mr. Slater said, he could understand why Mr. Lloyd Webber might relate to the material.“Everyone has gone through some period where they felt like they needed to break out of a category they had been put in and find their own voice,” he said. “That’s really what this show is about.”The composition of the musical (in which Alex Brightman plays the Dewey Finn character) happened quickly, between June and December of 2014. Auditions for its school-aged characters were held at the start of this year, and over the summer, a series of test shows were held at the Gramercy Theater, a sticky-floored rock club in Midtown Manhattan. Plans for a Broadway transfer were already in place — an unusually aggressive trajectory for a musical that never had an out-of-town tryout.The astronomical scale of Mr. Lloyd Webber’s past success would seem to have long ago launched him outside the realm of relatable human experiences. But to his mind, it has provided him with new ways to measure himself against his rock ’n’ roll heroes and come up short.Explaining his lifelong love of architecture, a field that he might have pursued professionally if it had not been for music, Mr. Lloyd Webber talked about his enthusiasm for the work of William Burges, a Victorian designer who created the Tower House in London.“I thought I wanted to buy it,” he said of the landmark building. “But my then-wife said she wouldn’t marry me if I bought it. Jimmy Page bought it instead.”At the very least, Mr. Lloyd Webber said, “That’s something I share with Jimmy Page.”