http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/05/us/la-police-release-video-of-fatal-shooting-of-man-say-he-had-a-gun.html
Los Angeles Police Release Video of Fatal Shooting; Say Man Had Gun - The New York Times
Los Angeles (Calif),Snell  Carnell Jr (1997-2016),Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Video Recordings  Downloads and Streaming,Police Department (Los Angeles  Calif)
Oct. 4, 2016
7363
After two days of protests and speculation surrounding a police shooting that killed an 18-year-old black man this weekend, the Los Angeles Police Department on Tuesday released video surveillance footage Tuesday it said proved that the man, Carnell Snell Jr., had been carrying a handgun.Investigators had recovered a handgun at the site of the shooting in South Los Angeles on Saturday, the authorities said, but the lack of publicly released footage from police body and dashboard cameras had prompted the protests, with activists demanding to see video footage, which often shed light on the shootings of black men across the country.In a statement on Tuesday, the Los Angeles Police Department said that releasing the surveillance video while criminal and administrative investigations were pending went against its practice, but that the move was a matter of public safety.In the 45-second video, Mr. Snell can be seen running into the parking lot of a small strip mall, darting in front of businesses and hiding behind a car. He tucks what appears to be a black handgun into the waistband of his pants before running the length of the strip mall and turning a corner. A police officer can be seen chasing him.The video, which has no sound, does not appear to show the shooting. Information on the races or ethnicities of the officers involved was not immediately available.In a news conference on Monday, Police Chief Charlie Beck said that officers had tried to stop the vehicle in which Mr. Snell was traveling because its license plates were covered by paper. He said this was often a calling card of people who have committed drive-by shootings and have attempted to conceal the ownership of a vehicle.After officers pursued the vehicle, Mr. Snell was one of two black men who ran. He was the only one caught. In the confrontation that followed, Chief Beck said, six shots were fired and Mr. Snell was hit twice, once in the torso and once in the knee. He was pronounced dead at the scene.A loaded semiautomatic handgun was recovered about five feet from where Mr. Snell fell.Mr. Snell was the first of two men to be fatally shot by police officers over the weekend. On Sunday, a Hispanic man was shot after he pointed what appeared to be a handgun at police officers, officials said.Chief Beck appeared to try and divorce the police shootings in Los Angeles from the shootings of unarmed black men, often caught on video, that have roiled the nation. He said that the encounter with Mr. Snell took place in a neighborhood where there had been about 450 shootings so far this year, and that his officers often found themselves in situations in which they had to defend themselves.“We are doing our absolute best to take guns out of the hands of those that would use them against others,” Chief Beck told reporters. “And certainly in both of these instances these officers feared for their lives because of the actions of the individuals that they were pursuing.”He also addressed the demand for video footage: “Video is part of the truth, but is not the totality of the truth. It has to be tempered with all of the evidence.”The explanation was of little comfort to those who still see the case as an example of police brutality, and that the violent outcome could have been avoided. Tiffany Hobbs, who said she was a former teacher of Mr. Snell’s, wrote on Facebook that she was afraid that his life would be “reduced to a hashtag.”Ms. Hobbs added: “Witnesses say that his hands were up when he was shot in the back. He will always be more than what the L.A.P.D. considers as disposable.”In the case of the second shooting this weekend, Chief Beck said on Monday that the gun held by the man had, in fact, been a replica but that the orange band that is used to differentiate it from real guns had removed or concealed. He said there was police body-camera footage of that shooting.Officer Norma Eisenman, a spokeswoman for the department, said on Tuesday that the dead man had not yet been identified.