https://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/20/opinion/south-koreas-new-president-must-challenge-the-north-on-human-rights.html
South Korea’s New President Must Challenge the North on Human Rights - The New York Times
Park Geun-hye,North Korea,South Korea,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations
Dec. 19, 2012
1508
Medford, Mass.PARK GEUN-HYE, who was elected yesterday to be South Korea’s first female president, will also become the first elected female leader anywhere in the Confucian civilization, which consists of China, Japan, North and South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and Vietnam, and makes up nearly a quarter of the world’s population.Yet the mark she puts on history will not be determined by her gender, or even by the domestic policies she campaigned on. It will depend on how successfully she can address the greatest moral challenge to the Korean nation: alleviating the tremendous suffering of fellow Koreans in North Korea, who are perhaps the most systematically oppressed people in the world today.To be sure, cracking the citadel of masculinity in a culture steeped in millenniums of male chauvinism is historic. Simply by winning, as the candidate of the governing center-right New Frontier party, Ms. Park instantly became a role model for hundreds of millions of women across East Asia.Indeed, her very candidacy revealed the depths of male chauvinism that many educated South Koreans blithely accept. In October, for example, a male psychology professor at a leading university pointed out that Ms. Park has never married or given birth, and commented on a TV program: “Women in Korean society attain the phenomenon of womanhood by getting married, giving birth and raising children. Park Geun-hye falls short of those conditions. Only her reproductive organ makes her a woman.”Competing in such an atmosphere, Ms. Park did have one advantage — South Koreans’ respect for the economic accomplishments of her father, Park Chung-hee, who in the 1960s and ’70s presided with an authoritarian hand over one of the modern world’s greatest economic turnarounds. Under his stewardship, South Korea eradicated abject poverty and mass hunger, and laid the groundwork for becoming an industrialized leader in global trade.In her campaign, Ms. Park promised further expansion of the economy, pledging to rebuild the middle class by creating jobs and restructuring the economy, while also lowering college tuition and expanding child care and other social welfare programs. Parties on the left proposed more drastic reforms and more generous programs, but South Korea’s voters evidently put their faith in Ms. Park’s more modest goals.Attending to economic health and social welfare are essential tasks for any national leader, of course. But they do not define the greatest national challenge that an affluent South Korea faces today. And Ms. Park would do well to remember why her father is widely honored today, in spite of his authoritarian rule: he, like other Korean leaders before and since, was able to define the most compelling national task of his time and accomplish it.The first such modern leader was Kim Ku, who, more than any other, is revered for leading Koreans in their struggle for independence during and after the peninsula’s occupation by Japan in the first half of the 20th century.Later, in the decades when Ms. Park’s father was in charge, reconstruction and economic development in the wake of the Korean War remained South Korea’s most compelling national challenge.And in the 1980s and ’90s, the central task was nurturing the seeds of democracy — the work for which former President Kim Dae-jung, a champion of popular government and human rights, is still admired despite his questionable policy of giving North Korea unconditional aid, including hundreds of millions of dollars in cash.Today, the single greatest calling for the ethnic Korean nation is liberating the North Korean people. For more than 60 years, North Koreans have languished in the shadow of a vast network of gulags, their lives are stripped of the most basic liberties — freedom of speech, thought, religion, assembly and movement.North Korea is unique among the world’s modern literate, industrialized, urbanized economies to have suffered a peacetime famine — in its case, a man-made disaster that claimed about 10 percent of the population in the mid- to late 1990s.So the need to improve the conditions of life inside North Korea is the urgent calling for an independent, affluent, free South Korea today. It is a calling that none of Park Geun-hye’s predecessors have attempted to answer, even though South Korea claims, in its Constitution, to be the sole legitimate government representing all Koreans.Ms. Park acknowledged the task when she stated during her campaign, “We cannot go on neglecting the suffering of the North Korean people, the very people who will be the main actors in a unified Korea.”She went on to say that she would try to prevent the forcible repatriation of North Koreans and would strengthen “the resettlement support program and tailored support system for North Korean defectors,” so that “each one of them may maximize their talents to their full potential.”Ms. Park’s challenge, once she takes office in February, will be to keep faith with such pledges. So far, no South Korean leader has made North Korean human rights a priority. None have ever called for North Korea to dismantle its concentration camps for political prisoners, nor have any met in public with North Korean defectors, for fear of provoking the leadership in Pyongyang, the capital.But today, as it was 60 years ago, the argument for calling on the North to tear down the camps and provide the North Korean people with information about the outside world is compelling. After all, a nation cannot remain half slave and half free, and the danger of doing so only increases with each year that the political and economic contrasts between the two halves of Korea increase.Ms. Park should strive to raise global and local awareness about North Korean human rights abuses. For example, she could generously increase funding for radio broadcasts and other information transmissions into North Korea; sponsor publications and international conventions on the subject; and greatly expand programs that support resettlement of North Koreans in South Korea.Such efforts may not yield visible results in the near term. Rather, they are likely to bring periods of impasse and tension in intra-Korean relations. But even if there is a decline in summit pageantry and diplomatic deals, these measures would achieve what really matters: they would encourage North Koreans to learn more about the outside world and demand, if only gradually, more from their leaders.Even modest progress on the protection of rights as basic as the right to life itself, and freedom from enslavement, or freedom of expression and assembly, would change North Korean lives for the better.And if such changes helped to deliver hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of fellow Koreans from bondage, they would give Park Geun-hye a legacy that no leader over the past two millenniums of Korean history can yet claim.