https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/fashion/mens-style/brooklyn-tailors-suits-williamsburg.html
Custom Suits for Guys Who Thought They Were Out of Reach - The New York Times
Brooklyn Tailors (Retailer),Suits (Apparel),Fashion and Apparel,Textiles
July 12, 2017
9796
Daniel Lewis (right) and his wife, Brenna, made suits in their apartment for two years before they opened their first Brooklyn Tailors in Williamsburg in 2011. “Originally, the idea was to offer custom tailored suits for the community around us,” said Mr. Lewis, 33, who studied fine art at the University of California, Santa Barbara and has no formal training in design. “We had a lot of friends in art and music, guys who had great taste but not the means to spend $4,000 on a custom suit in Manhattan. We thought we would have a couple orders every week.” The couple underestimated the demand for their custom suits, which cost about $1,700, and for their ready-to-wear models, priced at $1,350. Last summer, they moved their original shop into a larger space in Williamsburg, and in November, they opened a second location, in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn. “We draw upon the old school,” Mr. Lewis said, “but we try to create an aesthetic that’s a littler more modern and clean and sharp.”What kind of suits do you make for guys? We make everything from tuxedos to unconstructed, casual suits in denim, like the one I’m wearing. One thing we always talk about is that we’re the tailor for the well-dressed guy who’s not a suit guy. That translates into a construction that is a bit softer and narrower. But a lot of it has to do with fabric. The same cut in two different fabrics can be dramatically different. Some of the fabrics we use have more of a tooth and a grain to them. We use fabrics that are a little less refined, while still luxurious. We’re a tailoring brand that’s decidedly anti-dandy. Our competitors are into the big pocket square, the bright tie, the bold patterned suit. We’re more about minimalism.What are you recommending this summer? New Yorkers notoriously have a somber palette, and we have a deeper muted palette: grays, blacks, deep blues. So one of my favorite suits we’re doing this season is a black linen-cotton blend. It’s a quintessentially summer cloth but in a deeper, darker, serious tone. Wear it with a pair of white sneakers or something.You say you carry “manufacturer brands.” What’s that? That’s my own term, but it’s a brand that’s not really a brand; they’re a maker. They mostly make pieces for other labels. One example would be knitwear for Harley of Scotland. If you’ve seen a Scottish lamb’s wool sweater from a fashion brand for $500, there’s a good chance they made it. But we carry a simple lamb’s wool crew neck at a really incredible price: $145.You also sell pencils? Public-Supply is a cool company. They do notebooks and office supplies. They’re simple pieces that look great on your desk. I’m kind of a writing-utensil nerd.