http://www.nytimes.com/2003/02/02/us/loss-shuttle-astronauts-columbia-space-shuttle-s-crew-6-americans-1-israeli-146439.html
LOSS OF THE SHUTTLE: THE ASTRONAUTS; The Columbia Space Shuttle's Crew of 6 Americans and 1 Israeli - The New York Times
CHAWLA  KALPANA,ACCIDENTS AND SAFETY,SPACE,SPACE SHUTTLE,BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION,COLUMBIA (SPACE SHUTTLE),DEATHS (OBITUARIES)
Feb. 2, 2003
9922
Seven astronauts, six Americans and an Israeli, died aboard the shuttle Columbia yesterday. Of the crew of five men and two women, four had never flown in space before.Dr. Kalpana ChawlaQuiet and Modest, But Also DeterminedNearly everyone who walks into Don Seath's classroom has at least toyed with the thought of becoming an astronaut. Mr. Seath, who has taught aerodynamics at the University of Texas at Arlington since 1965, would be hard pressed to think of a student who on first meeting seemed less likely to go into space than Kalpana Chawla.It was not that she lacked brilliance. ''She was a very good student, quite excellent,'' Mr. Seath said in a telephone interview. ''She was in my aerodynamics class, and she performed exceedingly well. She was very bright.''What she did not have was the brash attitude most aspiring astronauts displayed.''She was quiet and modest,'' Mr. Seath said. ''When I heard she had been accepted into the program to become an astronaut I was thrilled but also surprised.'' She just did not seem to fit the type, he said.But Dr. Chawla, 41, never lacked determination, those who knew her said. From her childhood in Karnal, a small town about 80 miles north of New Delhi, she nursed a lifelong dream to go into space. She early on set her sights on an American education that would take her up into the air.''I was interested in aerospace and flying, and the U.S. is really the best place in the world for flying,'' she told the University of Texas at Arlington Magazine in 1998.Dr. Chawla was a brilliant student, always in the top five of her class, those who knew her said. After getting an engineering degree from Punjab Engineering College in 1982, she moved to the United States, where she attended the University of Texas at Arlington, then got a doctorate in aerospace engineering from the University of Colorado. Along the way she became a citizen of the United States.In 1994, NASA selected her and 19 other people from a group of 4,000 other applicants to its astronaut program. On Nov. 19, 1997, she became the first Indian-born woman in space. She was assigned to the shuttle Columbia as a mission specialist and prime robotic arm operator.The flight was not without mishaps. As robotic arm operator she was unable to retrieve the 3,000 pound Spartan satellite, which spun away after the shuttle released it, and astronauts had to go out on a space walk three days later to retrieve it. The mistake shook her confidence, and she feared her space career was over. But her concern was misplaced.''Some of the senior people, the very senior astronauts, shook my hand and said, 'K.C., you did a great job. Don't let anyone tell you different,' '' Dr. Chawla told the University of Texas at Arlington magazine. A NASA inquiry later determined that the shuttle crew had made a series of errors that caused the satellite to malfunction.In New Delhi, relatives of Dr. Chawla gathered to hear news and mourn together.''Whenever you are involved in such tasks, one should be prepared for such things,'' said Anjay Chawla, Dr. Chawla's brother, his voice choking as he spoke to reporters. ''If it could happen to others it could happen to you as well. This time it happened to us.''R. S. Bhatia, head of the Washington office of the Indian Space Research Organization, India's answer to NASA, said Dr. Chawla had become a symbol of India's greatness, even though she was no longer a citizen.''After her first flight, she became a national hero,'' Mr. Bhatia said. ''She is an American citizen, but she is ours too. This is the most terrible tragedy. We have lost a hero.''   LYDIA POLGREEN