https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/03/t-magazine/paris-department-store-le-bone-march-rive-gauche.html
In Paris, a Famed Department Store Goes ‘Brooklyn’ - The New York Times
Shopping and Retail,Bon Marche (Paris  France  Retailer),Paris (France)
Sept. 3, 2015
9323
They call it “Le Brook-leen,” and for the French, or Parisians at least, it is an exotic land far, far away. But there is something je ne sais quoi about Brooklyn that seduces the French — that intellectual approach to life and style, which, at its core, perhaps, is as français as Sartre and Beauvoir. So beginning this week, the Left Bank department store Le Bon Marché Rive Gauche will spotlight Brooklyn as its annual autumn cultural theme — a focus running throughout the store and its sister gourmet grocery, La Grande Epicerie. Items from more than 100 different Brooklyn purveyors will be for sale, including Catbird jewelry, Kinfolk men’s wear and Mast Brothers chocolates. The store’s commitment to the Brooklyn aesthetic is so complete as to border on caricature — they’ll even hawk Lynn & Lawrence woolen beanies and Ball mason jars (which happen to be made in Indiana).“Each time we go to New York, we find that we spend more and more time in Brooklyn, or we hear a lot about it,” says Jennifer Cuvilliers, the store’s style director. “We know a bit of Williamsburg, which is the center, but in fact Brooklyn is vast and it’s a lifestyle that is completely different from Manhattan. It really knocked us out.” Cuvilliers and her Bon Marché confreres spent a year researching the borough, with several on-the-ground visits, to “avoid the clichés and understand the local culture and the way Brooklynites live,” she explains. Along the way, she says they discovered “the networking, the community spirit, the farm-to-table movement, the kale” — pronounced “le kale” — “and we wanted to transpose those ideas and habits to Paris.”Among the “animations” the store will stage during Brooklyn’s three-month turn are a film installation by the musical duo Polo & Pan of a Coney Island-like rollercoaster, a pop-up tattoo shop with the renowned Saved Tattoo artist Scott Campbell (by appointment) and an old-fashioned New York-style barbershop. And though a couple of Left Bankers who visited the store this week remarked, “Brooklyn? Why Brooklyn?” Cuvilliers is convinced that Parisians will wholly embrace this cultural and commercial endeavor. “For us, Brooklyn is very rive gauche,” she insists. “It’s in the air de temps.”