http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/15/opinion/the-paris-climate-pact-will-need-strong-follow-up.html
The Paris Climate Pact Will Need Strong Follow-Up - The New York Times
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,Global Warming,Greenhouse Gas Emissions,United Nations,Obama  Barack,France,Kerry  John,International Relations,Editorials
Dec. 14, 2015
6395
Paris is over. The cheering and high-fiving have died down. Now comes the hard part.On Saturday, after two weeks of talks, 195 nations agreed on a plan that they hope will reduce the greenhouse gases warming the atmosphere and assure future generations of a livable world. Will it? Yes, or probably, or maybe, but only if the countries that promised to reduce their emissions honor those pledges and agree to improve significantly on them in the years to come.The French foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, described the agreement as a “historical turning point.” Ban Ki-moon, the secretary general of the United Nations, called it a “monumental success for the planet and its people.” Whether it turns out to be either of those things depends largely on what the individual signatories are willing to put into it. This is an agreement built firmly on science, but also on the hope that the enthusiasm generated in Paris will translate into concrete measures across the globe that will, in fact, prevent the worst consequences of climate change.The behavior of individual governments will be critical in determining whether the world moves forward with clean-energy technologies. Much was said about how the agreement sent a strong “signal” to investors, and indeed, Paris was swarming with corporate chieftains and Silicon Valley heavyweights. But the strength of that signal will depend heavily on whether governments are willing to promote such investments while removing the tax subsidies that favor dirtier fossil fuels — perhaps to the point of embracing carbon taxes.Here are key elements of the agreement:A strong scientific core The goal is to bring down pollution levels so that the rise in global temperatures is limited to no more than 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit), beyond which the most disruptive consequences of climate change — widespread drought and flooding and the dying-off of species, for instance — will kick in. The delegates also added language urging that the increase be limited even further, to 1.5 degrees if possible.Collective responsibility The deal includes commitments from 186 of the 195 signatories to cut or limit the growth of their greenhouse gas emissions. These pledges will get the world only halfway to the 2 degree goal. Yet they were enormously important. Decided months in advance, they came from rich and poor countries alike, reflecting a new sense of shared responsibility far different from the bitter arguments between rich and poor nations that paralyzed earlier climate talks.Regular assessments The signatories agreed to convene every five years to take stock, revisit their pledges and steadily increase them so that the 2 degree (or 1.5 degree) goal remains firmly in sight. This provision makes it clear that Paris is only the foundation for future efforts.Transparency One obstacle in earlier climate talks was that big developing countries like China did not want anyone looking over their shoulders. The new agreement requires regular and transparent reporting of every country’s carbon reductions. This is crucial because the pledges at the heart of the agreement are voluntary and unenforceable. One way to make sure countries stick to them and improve on them is regular public disclosure.This agreement had many heroes, including the French hosts, United Nations officials and the climate activists who never gave up on the idea of a global accord. But it is worth singling out President Obama, Secretary of State John Kerry and his chief negotiator, Todd Stern, who together brought China into the tent. This not only persuaded other developing countries to come aboard but also deprived opponents in Congress of their old argument that American action was pointless because China would never go along.