https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/24/fashion/marie-kondo-spark-joy.html
The Cult of Marie Kondo - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Kondo  Marie,Orderliness and Clutter,Spark Joy (Book),The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up (Book)
Jan. 23, 2016
1957
On Wednesday evening, the tidy and the would-be tidy sat very still on the fourth floor of the Barnes & Noble bookstore at Union Square in Manhattan, craning to hear the soft voice of Marie Kondo, the Japanese author of “The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up,” as she demonstrated her folding technique on ever more complex garments. She was balletic and masterly. When done, Ms. Kondo received a standing ovation.“Look at her, she’s adorable,” said Rita Wade, 51, a director of student affairs at a language center who said that she was in attendance because she was fascinated by Ms. Kondo’s global reach.The elfin Ms. Kondo, perhaps the world’s only decluttering celebrity, was promoting her new book, “Spark Joy,” a more prescriptive manual (it comes with illustrations) than her last, which is a publishing juggernaut. (Both titles are at the top of the New York Times best-seller list.)Kindly and self-mocking, Ms. Kondo was already a tidy freak, as she said (assisted by an interpreter), by age 5, irritating her family by throwing away their belongings and mystifying her teachers when she skipped recess to organize her classroom’s bookshelves.Now 31, KonMari, as she’s known, exhorts you to ask yourself, “Do your things spark joy?” If not, you must thank them for their service, and send them packing.It’s a liberating manifesto, though in practice it can take months. (This reporter once lost an entire weekend to the KonMari method.) Handle each object to properly gauge whether it truly thrills. Ms. Kondo suggests giving your clothes a hug, and mimed doing so as the audience gently applauded.Her approach to stuff isn’t just minimalism, said Yuko DeYoung, 50, an account manager at a news agency, and one of over 100 attendees at the book signing. “Her method is something more basic, something more …” Ms. DeYoung paused to find the right word, “… humane.”Indeed, this patting and hugging of belongings, a kind of compassionate organizing, has resonated beyond all reckoning. More than five million copies of Ms. Kondo’s books have been sold, along with licenses to print them in 40 languages, including Mongolian. Fox and NBC are working on a sitcom inspired by her.Last year, Time magazine named Ms. Kondo one of its 100 most influential people, in an encomium by the actress Jamie Lee Curtis, who proclaimed her devotion to Ms. Kondo by announcing that if she ever got a tattoo, it would say, “Spark Joy!”The Atlantic analyzed Ms. Kondo’s tidying method through the lens of behavioral economics. Consignment stores have been overwhelmed by donations from devotees.Inevitably, there was a backlash, and then a backlash against the backlash. Finally, a parody appeared that wasn’t quite parody: “The Life-Changing Magic of Not Giving a (expletive),” by Sarah Knight, out last month, was mostly practical.“So many books are about hoarding and clutter,” said Christian Freedom, 46. “It’s very shaming. I like her tone and her idea that untidiness is a spectrum.”Mr. Freedom was at Barnes & Noble with a friend, Darren Rosenblum, also 46, who had given him the book for Christmas, and they were disputing their place on that spectrum. Mr. Freedom, who lives in an L-shaped studio in the East Village and loves to collect jewelry, clothes and decorative objects, graded himself with a harsh nine; Mr. Rosenblum clocked him at about seven.Mr. Freedom said he had already filled a large duffel bag with castoffs, delivered to a thrift store. “I thanked my stuff and handed it off,” he said. “My therapist was really happy and said, ‘Can you do that twice a week?’”As for Mr. Rosenblum, a law professor at Pace University, he averred that his space was fairly clear but his desk was a mess. Not a lot of landscape there, he admitted, “but the baggage is heavy.”Lindsay Thomas, 32, who works at a humanitarian aid organization, said she was about halfway through Ms. Kondo’s categories, having ticked off clothes, paper and books. Her colleague Sara Brandsema, 29, was inspired by Ms. Thomas’s mood, which has been noticeably upbeat of late, she said. Also, having unearthed a few Starbucks gift cards in the process, Ms. Thomas had treated her to coffee.As Ms. Kondo signed her last book and smiled sweetly for the last selfie with a young woman wearing a black spangled watch cap, Kian Davis, a burly 23-year-old security guard working the event, said shyly that last year he had overseen her book signing at the West 82nd Street Barnes & Noble. He was so impressed that he bought the book and tidied his room. Had he mastered the folding?“I’m still trying,” Mr. Davis said.