https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/13/briefing/donald-trump-betsy-devos-emmy-awards.html
Donald Trump, Liu Xiaobo, Emmy Awards: Your Thursday Briefing - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
July 13, 2017
950
 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• A new era in medicine.A Food and Drug Administration panel unanimously recommended on Wednesday that the agency approve the first gene therapy to fight cancer.The treatment, for a type of leukemia, genetically alters a patient’s cells, transforming them into what scientists call “a living drug” that bolsters the immune system.The F.D.A. is likely to accept the recommendation, and other gene therapies are expected.•  Conspiracy or coincidence? News about a meeting between Donald Trump Jr. and a Russian lawyer has raised additional questions about interference in the 2016 election. Here’s a rundown of events over a two-month period last year.Mr. Trump had been promised damaging information about Hillary Clinton via the Russian government. Campaign opposition research is standard, but not from hostile nations.We introduce you to two unlikely players in the events: an entertainment publicist and a Russian pop star.Criticism of his son has left President Trump angry and protective, but he is  relieved that the worst appears to be over, people who spoke with him say.The president arrived in France this morning to celebrate Bastille Day with President Emmanuel Macron, who offers a rare outstretched hand from Europe.• New health bill is expected.The likely defection of two Senate Republicans has left their leaders no margin for error when they  unveil another version of legislation to repeal the Affordable Care Act today.Their struggle highlights an important lesson: Tax cuts for the rich, paired with reduced services for the poor, are politically unpalatable.• Chinese dissident  dies at 61.Liu Xiaobo, China’s most prominent political prisoner and a Nobel Peace Prize recipient, died under guard at a state hospital today at 61.Mr. Liu, who kept vigil on Tiananmen Square in 1989 to protect protesters from soldiers, was convicted in 2009 of inciting subversion. He had been calling for democracy, the rule of law and an end to censorship.• Sheldon Silver’s conviction is overturned.A federal appeals court today overturned the 2015 corruption conviction of the once-powerful New York State Assembly speaker, who was accused of obtaining nearly $4 million in illicit payments.The court cited a U.S. Supreme Court ruling last year that narrowed the definition of the kind of official conduct that can serve as the basis of a corruption prosecution.• Reviewing campus rape policies.Education Secretary Betsy DeVos is re-evaluating former President Barack Obama’s tough approach toward sexual assault at colleges and universities.The issue is deeply divisive: Women often say their trauma is not taken seriously, while many accused say the rules go too far.• Brazil’s ex-president is convicted.Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva  was found guilty on Wednesday of corruption and money laundering, and was sentenced to nearly 10 years in prison. We look at his rise and fall.• “The Daily,” your audio news report.In today’s show, we discuss the history and logistics of digging up dirt on political opponents.Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.• Hundreds of U.S. tech companies united to protest the government’s plan to scrap net neutrality rules.• There’s a new breed of employers: They build a team, do the job and say goodbye.• Uber said today that it had formed a partnership with a rival to offer ride-hailing services in Russia and several other Eastern European countries.• U.S. stocks were up on Wednesday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.• Meditation can help athletes, and everyone else, withstand stress.• Does your phone run out of power midday? Choose your charger wisely.• For something light, go with an herb and radish salad with feta and walnuts.• The blackout of 1977.In today’s 360 video, visit The Times archive to see how we covered two chaotic days 40 years ago.• Partisan writing you shouldn’t miss.Read about how the other side thinks: Writers from across the political spectrum discuss Donald Trump Jr.’s emails.• An exciting life and lonely death.Jackson Vroman traveled the world, playing basketball, partying and drawing friends into his circle. His death at 34 cast a lonely light on his life.• And the nominees are …Nominations for the 69th Emmy Awards will be revealed at 11:30 a.m. Eastern today. We’ll cover the announcement live.With “Game of Thrones” out of contention, the best drama category is wide open.• Raising a bilingual child.Speaking two languages like a native is a relatively rare and beautiful thing. “It’s worth it, but it’s a lot of work,” a developmental psychologist said.• Best of late-night TV.Speaking to Stephen Colbert, John Oliver said his team’s off-air jokes about the Trump administration had proved more prescient than he had imagined.• Quotation of the day.“This is a big change. Maps will need to be redrawn.”— Adrian Luckman, a researcher monitoring the Larsen C ice shelf in Antarctica, which lost a chunk of ice the size of Delaware this week.Recent reports that the Pentagon spent millions to license a camouflage pattern that replicates lush forests — to be worn in largely arid Afghanistan — got us thinking about the famous design.As it turns out, the word “camouflage” appeared in The Times for the first time 100 years ago.The concept of disguising matériel and soldiers to blend in with their surroundings originated in the 1800s and was further developed during World War I.In May 1917, a New York lawyer who visited the French battlefront wrote about it for The Times’s Magazine section.The French used camouflage on a wide scale, with a unit made of artists known as “camoufleurs.” In August 1917, the U.S. Army issued its own call for enlistment in a “camouflage force,” seeking “young men who are looking for special entertainment in the way of fooling Germans.”Camouflage later became common in art and fashion. A 2007 exhibit at the Imperial War Museum in London noted links to Cubism. (Picasso exclaimed upon seeing a camouflage cannon in Paris: “It was us who created that.”)The artist Andy Warhol also used it, substituting bright colors for earth tones, which removed the military symbolism but retained the notion of hiding.Karen Zraick contributed reporting._____Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.