https://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/16/world/asia/china-to-investigate-death-of-labor-activist.html
China to Investigate Death of Labor Activist - The New York Times
China,Li Wangyang,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Suicides and Suicide Attempts,Political Prisoners
June 15, 2012
7603
BEIJING — Chinese officials, bending to public pressure, have announced an investigation into the death of a veteran labor activist whose body was found hanging from a hospital window this month, days after he gave a series of interviews in which he vowed to continue fighting to end the Communist Party’s monopoly on power.The dissident, Li Wangyang, who was convicted of organizing protests during the pro-democracy movement of 1989, had only recently emerged from prison. Friends and relatives have questioned how Mr. Li could have taken his own life because he was disabled from the beatings and other mistreatment he suffered during his 21 years behind bars.Mr. Li, 62, was blind, nearly deaf and had difficulty walking unassisted.According to the state-run Hong Kong China News Agency, public security officials in Hunan Province, where Mr. Li died, promised an investigation by a “team of experienced criminal investigation experts.” According to the agency, a police spokesman acknowledged that public pressure had prompted the announcement on Thursday.Earlier this week, local officials in Shaoyang, the city where Mr. Li died, changed the cause of death to “accidental” from “suicide.”Human rights advocates raised doubts after his death became public, but the suspicions began to spread more widely in the past week after family members and friends of Mr. Li disappeared or were warned by the police not to speak to the news media.His death has become a cause célèbre in Hong Kong, and thousands of people took to the streets last weekend to call for an independent investigation. Several prominent officials also joined the chorus of those doubting the police accounts of Mr. Li’s suicide. On Thursday, Hong Kong’s chief executive, Donald Tsang, took the rare step of publicly challenging the mainland authorities by describing Mr. Li’s death as “suspicious” and said he had conveyed his sentiments to Beijing. Hong Kong, a former British colony, is a special administrative region that enjoys greater liberties than the rest of China.Questions about Mr. Li’s death emerged soon after his body was found on June 6 hanging from the metal bars of a window in his hospital room. His sister, one of the first to discover his body, expressed doubts about his ability to fashion the noose she found tied around his neck. She also told friends that his feet were still touching the ground. A photograph purportedly showing his feet was widely circulated on the Internet, causing a stir among activists who cited it as proof of foul play.Those who had visited Mr. Li in recent weeks said his feistiness was undiminished and that he would have left a note explaining his decision to take his own life.As the suspicions spread on the Internet, Mr. Li’s sister and as many as a dozen others were detained by the police or placed under surveillance.One of them, Yin Zhengan, a friend and fellow dissident, said rotating shifts of minders were preventing him from leaving the teahouse he runs on the outskirts of Shaoyang.In a telephone interview on Friday, he said he was relieved that the authorities had agreed to look into Mr. Li’s death but said they should follow up their vows of transparency by allowing him and the others to go free. “This is how the government can show its credibility,” said Mr. Yin, who was imprisoned for three years in the early 1980s on charges of “spreading counterrevolutionary propaganda.”Reached by telephone, a representative at the Hunan Public Security Bureau declined to discuss the investigation. Many questions, however, remain, including how the autopsy promised by the police can be carried out given that Mr. Li’s body has already been cremated, reportedly “at the request of relatives,” according to an earlier statement released by the Shaoyang Propaganda Bureau.Some analysts say the decision to investigate Mr. Li’s death demonstrates the Communist Party’s sensitivity to public pressure, especially in places like Hong Kong. Cynics, however, say the announcement simply revealed the leadership’s desire to tamp down any public protest that could mar a visit by President Hu Jintao, who is expected to attend celebrations on July 1 for the 15th anniversary of the territory’s return to Chinese control.Joseph Yu-shek Cheng, a political science professor at City University of Hong Kong, said the public outrage was compounded by a number of factors, including mounting concern over human rights abuses in China, an aversion to what many perceive as Beijing’s growing influence over Hong Kong’s affairs, and the fact that Mr. Li had given an interview to Hong Kong television shortly before his death.Some people, Mr. Cheng said, interpreted Mr. Li’s death as a warning. “Don’t interfere in China and don’t try to interview these kinds of people,” he said. “You’ll see what happens.”