https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/20/magazine/new-sentences-from-infinite-tuesday-by-michael-nesmith.html
New Sentences: From ‘Infinite Tuesday,’ by Michael Nesmith - The New York Times
Pop and Rock Music,Books and Literature,Monkees  The (Music Group),Hendrix  Jimi
June 20, 2017
6445
Here is a pithy summation of the special loneliness of genius. Great artists live in a world in which their own excellence does not exist. They are shut out, uniquely, from their defining achievements. In the same way that an apple can’t eat an apple and a sunset can’t admire a sunset and the Matterhorn can’t ski its own slopes, Michael Jackson could never watch himself dance, at least not the way everyone else on Earth did. Although Herman Melville wrote every word of “Moby-Dick,” he could never read it as a reader — could never unsee the origin of all those wild metaphors, never turn the page with true surprise. Artists may know when they’ve done something great, but they’ll never know what it’s like to experience it from the other end. It’s like how we can’t tickle our own feet.This sentence comes from someone who is in a position to know. Michael Nesmith was a member of the Monkees, the made-for-TV 1960s rock band that was invented to capitalize on the wild success of the Beatles. While the Beatles could never see the Beatles, the Monkees could definitely see the Monkees: Their whole existence was a kind of meta-spectacle, an attempt to capture eyeballs by mimicking the greatest eyeball-capturers of the era. They were like puppets who were always hyperaware of what the puppeteers were doing with them. Over the decades, Nesmith used this position of ersatz greatness to meet not only Hendrix and Lennon but also Jack Nicholson, Johnny Cash, Timothy Leary, Douglas Adams and the guys from Monty Python. Hendrix told Nesmith, just two days before his death, that he had been taking singing lessons. “Why?” Nesmith responded. “You have one of the greatest voices in rock ’n’ roll.” Hendrix said he felt that he sang flat.