https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/24/world/asia/south-koreas-president-has-no-easy-options-in-dealing-with-an-aggressive-north.html
South Korea’s President Has No Easy Options in Dealing with an Aggressive North - The New York Times
Nuclear Tests,United States International Relations,Strategic Forecasting Inc (Stratfor),Park Geun-hye,Kim Jong-un,North Korea,South Korea,Nuclear Weapons
Sept. 23, 2016
5090
SEOUL, South Korea — After North Korea conducted its fifth and most powerful nuclear test this month, South Korea’s president, Park Geun-hye, met with her country’s opposition leaders to discuss how to react. The outcome was not surprising.Her liberal political opponents urged her to talk to the government in Pyongyang. Ms. Park, a conservative, said that would be a waste of time. Rather, she said, South Korea and its allies must focus on tightening sanctions, pressing the North to give up its nuclear program or face collapse.“This is a battle of wills that we must win,” Ms. Park told the opposition leaders, asking them to support her position. They refused. One of them said later that talking to the president was “like talking to a wall.”Pyongyang’s Sept. 9 nuclear test, its second this year, has sharpened South Korea’s decades-old divide over how to deal with its belligerent neighbor, as the North makes what experts consider significant strides in its nuclear arms and missile development. And it has left Ms. Park more embattled than ever as she approaches her last year in office.While pushing for yet more sanctions, Ms. Park has doubled down on confrontational speech toward both Pyongyang and her domestic critics. This comes just months after she responded to the North’s growing threat by embracing an American missile defense system, angering China and dismaying many South Koreans.Analysts say Ms. Park, who is barred under South Korea’s Constitution from seeking re-election next year, has two equally unpalatable options.She can stay on her current course, facing more provocations from Pyongyang and the likelihood of going down in history as the president during whose term the North completed nuclear weaponization. Or she can try to engage an erratic government that has gone so far as to call her a prostitute, and that has not agreed to discuss the possibility of nuclear disarmament in any future talks.“Negotiations may still be possible, but the price to pay to North Korea has become much higher,” said Cho Han-bum, an analyst at the Korea Institute for National Unification, a government research organization in Seoul.Doubts about Ms. Park’s North Korea policy have spread even within her own conservative party. While most of its leading contenders to succeed her support sanctions against the North, they have gone further, saying that Seoul should consider asking the United States to bring back tactical nuclear weapons, which it withdrew from the South in the early 1990s. Some party heavyweights have even said the South should build its own nuclear bombs. Ms. Park’s government has disavowed both options.Ms. Park’s difficulties have much to do with South Korea’s fractured domestic politics, in which liberal and conservative parties have often seized on North Korea as a way to discredit one another.When progressives were in power from 1998 to 2008, they provided the North with massive shipments of aid, and engaged in investment and trade, betting that such actions would draw Pyongyang out of its hostile posture — what was known as the “sunshine policy.”That decade of engagement slowed North Korea’s nuclear pursuits for a time, but did not stop them — the North conducted its first nuclear test in 2006. Ms. Park’s conservative predecessor, Lee Myung-bak, who took office in 2008, reversed course, curtailing aid and trade with the North, punishing it with tougher sanctions and refusing to negotiate until it committed to denuclearizing.Ms. Park, 64, who became president in 2013, went farther down that path. The prevailing argument in Seoul and Washington — wishful thinking, critics say — was that the North would eventually buckle under economic pressure, or perhaps even implode under the untested leadership of Kim Jong-un, the young leader who came to power in late 2011. After Pyongyang’s fourth nuclear test in January, Ms. Park cut the Koreas’ last remaining economic tie: a jointly run industrial park in the border town of Kaesong.But the North’s nuclear program has only accelerated in recent years. Three of the North’s five nuclear tests have taken place under Mr. Kim, during whose rule the North has tested 31 ballistic missiles, twice as many as it did during the 17 years that his father, Kim Jong-il, was in power. This year alone, the North test-launched 24 ballistic missiles. On Sunday, Yun Byung-se, South Korea’s foreign minister, acknowledged that North Korea was “at the final stage of nuclear weaponization.”The North’s missile threat was Ms. Park’s justification for accepting the deployment of an American missile-interceptor battery, known as Thaad (for Terminal High Altitude Area Defense), on South Korean soil, a proposal that had been discussed with Washington for years. But that decision angered China — North Korea’s sole major ally, whose cooperation is crucial for enforcing sanctions — which sees Thaad as part of an American effort to encircle it.Ms. Park’s choice of Washington over Beijing in the dispute has been seen here as a momentous decision and a central part of her legacy. “When President Park calls Thaad inevitable, she sends a message that when relations between the United States and China turn bad and South Korea has to choose, it will be the United States,” said Lee Jung-chul, a political scientist at Soongsil University in Seoul.The Thaad deployment has been highly contentious here, with many South Koreans seeing their country as a pawn in a contest for supremacy between the two powers. And it has added fuel to the criticism of Ms. Park.Choo Mi-ae, the leader of the main opposition party, has called the system “militarily useless” and a “diplomatic checkmate” that pushed China closer to Pyongyang. In a commentary published by the Institute for Far Eastern Studies in Seoul, former Foreign Minister Song Min-soon said the issue had become a “shibboleth” by which South Koreans distinguished political friend from foe.Critics have also accused Ms. Park of stoking fear about North Korea to bolster her domestic leadership, a tactic they say recalls the days of her father, the military dictator Park Chung-hee. Last week, warning of a “danger of war” and a “national emergency,” Ms. Park called for “a thorough surveillance of impure domestic forces and those who cause social instability.”That has reinforced a hard-line image that Ms. Park has had since taking office. During her tenure, it has become fashionable among conservatives to label all anti-government dissidents as “jongbuk,” or followers of North Korea. Her government shut down a small left-wing opposition party on charges of subscribing to North Korea’s communist ideology. Ms. Park’s language about the North has also become more uncompromising — in recent weeks she has called Mr. Kim “out of control” and “maniacally obsessive.”A poll conducted this week by Gallup Korea found that Ms. Park’s approval rating had slipped to 31 percent, essentially unchanged from two weeks earlier, before the North’s latest nuclear test. Still, her governing Saenuri party is more popular than the opposition and remains loyal to the president in Parliament.In recent years, the South Korean military has drawn up plans to launch a pre-emptive strike against the North’s leadership at the first indication that it is preparing a nuclear missile attack. Such policies have helped to keep Ms. Park popular among older, more conservative South Koreans, who have vivid memories of the Cold War and revere the anti-Communist stance of her father.But not everyone is assured. “In adopting a more aggressive posture and acquiring the weapons to match it, South Korea risks raising the chances of conflict on the Korean Peninsula and fostering regional instability in the meantime,” the global intelligence company Stratfor said in a recent analysis.