https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/03/us/oregon-shooting-umpqua-chris-harper-mercer.html
In Note Left Behind, Gunman ‘Did Not Like His Lot in Life,’ Officials Say - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,School Shootings and Armed Attacks,Colleges and Universities,Harper-Mercer  Christopher (1989-2015),Roseburg (Ore),Umpqua Community College
Oct. 2, 2015
7073
ROSEBURG, Ore. —  The gunman who killed nine people on a college campus set out on his rampage armed with six guns, a flak jacket and enough ammunition to do far more damage — an angry, isolated young man whose rage was fueled by animus toward religion and resentment at how his life was unfolding, law enforcement officials said Friday.At the scene of the carnage, on the campus of Umpqua Community College, investigators found a typed statement several pages long, written by the gunman, who died there in a shootout with the police, describing his life as a deck of cards stacked against him. He was a student at the college and was enrolled in the writing class he targeted, local authorities said on Friday.“He didn’t have a girlfriend, and he was upset about that,” said a senior law enforcement official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the matter publicly. “He comes across thinking of himself as a loser. He did not like his lot in life, and it seemed like nothing was going right for him.”The gunman, who has been identified as Christopher Harper-Mercer, 26, “seems to be someone who was very anti-organized religion,” the official said, adding, “it does not appear like he was part of some larger group.” Investigators are poring through the trail of anger Mr. Mercer left online, including what one official described as “hateful writings,” and through a computer of his that was recovered.The gunman brought five handguns and a rifle to the college on Thursday morning, the Douglas County Sheriff’s Department said, though it was not clear how many of those he fired. He also had two pistols, four rifles and a shotgun in his apartment. In all, he had owned 14 firearms, said Celinez Nunez, an agent with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.“All 14 have been traced to a federal firearms dealer,” some bought by the gunman and others by members of his family, said Ms. Nunez, the assistant special agent in charge of the Seattle field office. “They were all purchased legally,” she said.“We also were able to recover a flak jacket lying next to the rifle at the school,” Ms. Nunez said. “The jacket had steel plates, along with five magazines. An additional amount of ammunition was also recovered at the apartment.”When the police reached Mr. Harper-Mercer, they shot and wounded him, a law enforcement official said. He was able to run away and then shot himself. He died in an ambulance en route to the hospital; the official said it was unclear whether the self-inflicted wound was the fatal one.A day after Umpqua joined the sad roster of schools struck by similar tragedies, family members of some survivors said their relatives had told them that the gunman had specifically targeted Christians. Law enforcement officials would not confirm or deny that.“ ‘Are you a Christian?’ he would ask them,” Stacy Boylan, father of Anastasia Boylan, 18, told CNN. “‘And if you’re a Christian, stand up.’ And they would stand up and he said, ‘Good, because you’re a Christian, you’re going to see God in just about one second.’ And then he shot and killed them, and then he kept going down the line doing this to people.”Mr. Boylan said his daughter was shot in the spine but survived.His was one of several accounts that emerged Friday of what happened when the gunman stormed an expository writing class in Snyder Hall.J. J. Vicari, 19, was in another classroom in the same building when the gunfire began shortly after 10:30 a.m. He said another student, a woman, ran out of the room to investigate, then staggered back in, bleeding. She told the others to lock the door, and then slumped to the ground.“We all jumped under the desk,” Mr. Vicari said in an interview at his home in Sutherlin, 15 miles north of Roseburg. “I heard every shot.”Over the next 15 minutes, hunched on the floor, he heard 30 to 40 gunshots. A woman’s scream. He said he never saw or heard the gunman. He texted his girlfriend, “I want to tell you I love you,” and “I’m scared.” Two students attended to their wounded classmate as her breathing slowed.Chris Mintz, 30, was shot multiple times and his legs were broken, but he is expected to live, according to family members interviewed by the television station WGHP in North Carolina, where he grew up.Mr. Mintz “tries to block the door to keep the gunman from coming, gets shot three times, hits the floor, looks up at the gunman and says ‘It’s my son’s birthday today,’ gets shot two more times,” Wanda Mintz, his aunt, told WGHP.A cousin, Ariana Earnhardt, said, “His vital signs are O.K., I mean, he’s going to have to learn to walk again, but he walked away with his life, and that’s more than so many other people did.”On a recording of emergency workers’ radio traffic, six minutes after the initial call of a shooting, a police officer can be heard saying: “We’re exchanging shots with him. He’s in a classroom on the southeast side of Snyder Hall.”Just over two minutes later, an officer shouted, “The suspect is down.”The shooting renewed the heated debate over gun control that has followed mass shootings in so many parts of the country, with President Obama speaking emotionally on Thursday, and again on Friday, calling on Congress to take measures to curb gun violence. But Oregon’s top elected officials, Democrats in a state where guns and hunting are popular, took a much more cautious tone on Friday.Speaking at a news conference here, Gov. Kate Brown and Senators Ron Wyden and Jeff Merkley all said some steps should be taken, but that now was not the time to decide what those should be, or even to discuss them. And all avoided using the phrase “gun control.”Mr. Merkley, who was born in Douglas County and lived here for the first several years of his life, said one of the people killed at the college was a cousin. “This horrific, this senseless act, has broken hearts, every heart here,” he said.Through the day Friday, more than 100 law enforcement officers continued to comb through the crime scene and interview witnesses and people who knew the gunman. Sheriff John Hanlin of Douglas County refused to say the gunman’s name and vowed that even as it was released by other agencies, it would not be uttered by his department. Echoing a position taken by officials in some other places rocked by mass shootings, he said he would not give the gunman the fame he craved, and asked journalists to follow his lead, rekindling an old debate about the role of the news media.