https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/06/nytnow/your-wednesday-briefing-ted-cruz-bernie-sanders-panama-papers.html
Your Wednesday Briefing: Ted Cruz, Bernie Sanders, Panama - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
April 6, 2016
9094
 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)Good morning.Here’s what you need to know:• Double-digit wins for Cruz and Sanders. Senator Ted Cruz’s victory over Donald J. Trump in Wisconsin increases the chances that the fight for the Republican nomination will not be settled until the party’s convention in July.Senator Bernie Sanders’s win in the state was his sixth in a row, giving him momentum — and an expected deluge of new donations — for his bid to upset Mrs. Clinton in her adopted home state of New York in two weeks.Here are our takeaways and last night’s full results. We also look at a 2011 lawsuit Mr. Trump settled, and at why the Libertarian Party is optimistic about its chances in the general election.• Panama Papers fallout.Officials around the world are scrambling to beat back public outrage over the documents that shed light on how the rich and powerful hide their money. Iceland’s prime minister resigned on Tuesday amid the scandal.What led to the papers’ being leaked? A cryptic message to a German newspaper kicked off an investigation. Follow the latest developments here.• Political turmoil in the South.Tensions are escalating between social conservatives and corporations after Mississippi became the latest state to sign a law protecting discrimination against same-sex couples. PayPal says it would cancel a plan to create 400 jobs in North Carolina because of a similar measure affecting gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people.Unrelated to the backlash, there’s a movement to impeach Alabama’s governor amid a sex scandal.• Origins of Zika.To better understand the virus that has spread across South America this year, our reporter visited a place in Uganda called the Zika Forest, where scientists gave the mosquito-borne disease its name in 1947.In anticipation of a rise in cases in the U.S. this summer, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is expressing concern that local governments are unprepared to tackle the crisis.• Examining a gunman’s iPhone.The F.B.I. isn’t saying whether the information it extracted from the iPhone used by a gunman in the San Bernardino, Calif., attack has been useful to its investigation.A lawyer for the bureau says it hasn’t told Apple how it cracked the company’s vaunted encryption methods. The comments come as WhatsApp, which is owned by Facebook, introduced full encryption for its service, to ensure that only the sender and recipient can see photos, videos and group text messages.• Fake school, real arrests.There were no classes or teachers at the University of Northern New Jersey. That’s because it was created by federal law enforcement officers as a way to catch criminals involved in student visa fraud.More than 20 people were recently arrested, government officials say.• San Francisco became the first city in the U.S. to approve six weeks of fully paid leave for new parents.• There are signs that President Obama’s effort to stop American companies from moving income overseas to pay lower taxes may be working.The drug makers Pfizer and Allergan are abandoning their $152 billion merger faced with a crackdown on overseas tax strategies.• Financial advisers will now be required to do something you may have thought was already a law: to act in the best interests of their clients.New government regulations mean that brokers must recommend investments that are more than just “suitable.”• A University of Virginia student whose account of a gang rape was the basis of a retracted Rolling Stone article must testify in a defamation case against the magazine, a judge has ruled.• Here are snapshots of the U.S. and global markets.• Total dominance.Four titles in four years. The unprecedented feat in women’s basketball is what Connecticut accomplished on Tuesday night, capping an undefeated season by beating Syracuse, 82-51.• “I read a lot.”Lin-Manuel Miranda, the star and creator of the Broadway hit “Hamilton,” tells us about his favorite authors and the novel he most enjoyed teaching at a New York City high school.Some of our recent book reviews include “Consequence,” a memoir by a former Abu Ghraib interrogator, and “Lab Girl,” by the professor Hope Jahren on the secret life of plants. We also examine a collection of works on polygamy and the future of marriage.• Don’t be an April fool.Our science section is debunking common misconceptions about health and science. The latest post takes aim at the perceived dangers of asteroid belts.• Costs of convenience.Meal kits for home delivery are increasingly popular. But  can you call it cooking? Chefs and cookbook authors weigh in.• Our recipes of the day.Sometimes you just need a pizza with shrimp, bacon and artichoke. Or, try a crunchy, colorful stir-fry that has an added kick from serrano chiles.“All truly great thoughts are conceived by walking.”That quotation by the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche was included in a Stanford University study in 2014 that showed how walking can fuel creative thought.It’s no mystery that walking enhances health. But researchers have found that it also improves the flow of oxygen to the brain, helping with mental awareness and memory.Today is National Walking Day, and many cities are participating. The annual event was introduced by the American Heart Association about 10 years ago because people, it says, spend too much time sitting in front of screens at work and home.Regularly placing one foot in front of the other, ideally briskly, for at least 30 minutes a day can offset that inactivity and reduce the risk of obesity, heart disease and stroke. And more good news: Researchers have found that walkers are most likely burning more calories than they think.There is a lot of advice out there about the types of shoes to buy, how to stretch and the pros and cons of activity trackers.But no philosophizing is needed to figure out the first step: Get off your behind.Christine Hauser contributed reporting.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.