https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/17/opinion/murong-xuecun-xis-selective-punishment.html
Xi’s Selective Punishment - The New York Times
China,Xi Jinping,Corruption (Institutional)
Jan. 16, 2015
9773
HONG KONG —  A Chinese government official I know was put under shuanggui, the secretive system of internal Communist Party investigation in which victims are detained, questioned without counsel and sometimes tortured. He was held for several months last year, and he now awaits trial. This midlevel apparatchik in Yunnan Province was responsible for city planning and construction. I don’t know why they targeted him — shuanggui is so opaque. Friends think he was an able official who may have taken a few bribes. But the most probable reason for his travails with the authorities was that his political patron also got in trouble.I don’t know who his political godfather was, but in the last year a tempest has shaken Yunnan, and indeed, the whole country. A huge number of top officials have been either arrested or placed under investigation. Some have been driven to suicide. Quite likely this official’s political sponsor was one of these people. Whenever a top official falls, people aren’t concerned about what he has done, but with those he might bring down with him.In the past two years, President Xi Jinping’s anticorruption drive has burnished his reputation with the Chinese media. And some in the international commentariat have also expressed support, and even praise, for Mr. Xi’s campaign. Yet suspicions persist that the crackdown is selective.In my view, the anticorruption push is more of a Stalinist purge than a genuine attempt to clean up the government. Charges are framed with reference to party regulations, not the law. Investigations are run by K.G.B.-type cadres, not the regular judicial system. China’s media does not report on cases until they are made public, after which there is a barrage of almost identically worded reports used to incriminate the suspect. Most telling of all, the purge has mainly targeted specific party factions, while those groups that support and pledge loyalty to Mr. Xi appear untouched.Many analysts say that Mr. Xi’s most important supporters are the so-called second generation reds — descendants of senior Communist Party founders. (Mr. Xi himself is one of them.) This privileged tribe enjoys almost unimaginable power, access to limitless resources, and extraordinary opportunities for enrichment. They are seldom investigated.The rule-proving exception, the former Chongqing party chief Bo Xilai, fell from grace after a power struggle rather than from the amount of money he embezzled, as the government claimed. (Before Mr. Xi rose to power, Mr. Bo was his most powerful rival within the party.)Even so, the handling of Mr. Bo’s case differed greatly from those of officials cut from humbler cloth, such as Zhou Yongkang, a former high-ranking official without family ties to party elite who is now under investigation for corruption. The waves of arrests during the investigation of Mr. Zhou swept up his family, staff and extended to the departments and places where he had worked before. To deal with Mr. Zhou, the net was cast wide across Sichuan Province and the oil industry.High officials in China exercise unchecked power (until they don’t). There are few restrictions on their ability to promote their followers, and they can be brazen in accepting bribes. Their departments, their territories — these are their private domains. Just as the former party secretary of Taian, Hu Jianxue, famously remarked, “When an official reaches my level, he answers to no one.”But in Mr. Xi’s former fiefdoms —  before attaining national power he held office in Fujian and Zhejiang provinces — as best I can tell not one official above the deputy provincial level has been arrested for corruption. Recently the question was raised in a post on the Internet: Why have no “big tigers” been found in Fujian and Zhejiang?  The message was almost immediately deleted.It seems unlikely that Mr. Xi will let this campaign roll on indefinitely. If the investigations of high officials continue into Mr. Xi’s second five-year term, it might suggest personal incompetence. Once Mr. Xi has vanquished any possible perceived threats to his power, he will end it. And when it’s over, Mr. Xi’s  network of followers will revert to  their corrupt ways.Yet many Chinese people harbor illusions about Mr. Xi. At a recent get together, a professor asked me: When Xi Jinping has all the power in his hands, what will he do with it? This professor seemed to think that Mr. Xi might use his authority to guide China toward democracy. But this notion is wishful thinking. For a dictator, power is not a means to an end, power is the end.Mr. Xi’s anticorruption drive has led to the downfall of thousands of corrupt officials, but where are the signs that he will establish a system that safeguards against corruption in the future? Where is the promise that he might subject his own power or that of his cronies to oversight?A leader who stamps on freedom of expression, basks in the praise of a  sycophantic media and fills jails with honest dissenters has no interest in democracy. He is just another dictator. Besides, anticorruption campaigns don’t guarantee real justice. When the government media runs reports about cases that are still under investigation and gloats about how severely corrupt officials are being punished, it seems improbable that the accused will get a proper defense. They may well have committed crimes, but they have rights too, even if they have denied them to others.As deputy director of the Hunan Province justice department, Wan Chuanyou oversaw the surveillance and intimidation of rights lawyers. According to the lawyer Cai Ying, in May 2014 Mr. Wan stopped Mr. Cai several times from meeting with someone accused in a shuanggui investigation.Cai Ying asked him: If one day you are placed under investigation what will you do? Wan Chuanyou answered: How could that possibly happen to me?Five months later, Wan Chuanyou was put under shuanggui. Murong Xuecun  is a novelist and blogger and the author of “Leave Me Alone: A Novel of Chengdu.” This article was translated by Harvey Thomlinson from the Chinese. 