http://www.nytimes.com/2005/11/01/science/physics-laureate-hopes-to-help-students-over-the-science-blahs.html
Physics Laureate Hopes to Help Students Over the Science Blahs - The New York Times
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES,PHYSICS,NOBEL PRIZES
Nov. 1, 2005
1778
BOULDER, Colo. - The Nobel laureate Carl E. Wieman may have won the highest honor in science, but he spends a big part of his life teaching physics to undergraduates at the University of Colorado.In recent years, Colorado has become something of a mini-factory for Nobelists. Last month, John L. Hall, known as Jan, was chosen as one of three physics winners for his work on lasers. Dr. Wieman and Eric A. Cornell, a colleague, were co-winners with Wolfgang Ketterle in 2001 for proving the existence of an exotic form of matter known as the Bose-Einstein condensate. Thomas Cech won the 1989 chemistry prize. Since winning, Dr. Wieman has led reform of the way undergraduate physics is taught at universities. He does so, in part, by example."Many science professors aim only to produce more scientists when they teach," Dr. Wieman, 54, said in an interview in his office. "They teach to one-tenth of 1 percent of the students. That's not good for society. It's producing a citizenry that thinks of science as having no connection to their lives."Q. Your colleague John Hall has just won a Nobel Prize for applying quantum physics to optics research. Have you given him any Nobel advice yet?A. No. Jan is much more senior. He's 71 and at a very different stage in his career and his life. I would not feel in a position to give him any advice, except perhaps, "Remember to bow to the king of Sweden after he hands you the award."As you may recall, when we received the prize, my close friend and collaborator Eric Cornell forgot to bow. I still kid him about it.Q. You used your Nobel money to finance a project aimed at changing the way undergraduate physics is taught in the United States. Why give away a quarter of a million dollars?A. I've long thought that undergraduate science is poorly taught. Undergraduates think of science usually as something they have to "go through," a class where they memorize a bunch of disconnected facts and formulas. It has no connection to anything around them. They learn it in the same way they might learn Latin -- by rote.Moreover, the subject matter is taught quickly, overwhelmingly, without any concern for what young people can take in cognitively. After a while you have them thinking, This is what science is! And then you get them graduating and sometimes becoming K-12 teachers themselves. They then repeat this, believing, This is how science should be taught, because this is how I was taught.I wanted to employ new teaching techniques and technology to find ways to break this cycle. My wife is a physicist, with a good job. We're more than comfortably off. We weren't going to spend the money on ourselves, anyway.Q. What exactly did your prize money buy?A. Well, I teach a basic two-term undergraduate course for nonscientists, The Physics of Everyday Life. This year I'm teaching, Physics for Engineers. The money bought staff and technology to do things differently in those classes. A lot of it went to pay people to work with me to create interactive animated simulations that teach students basic physics concepts.We've posted these on the Web -- phet.colorado.edu -- so that other teachers can benefit from our work. It's downloadable and free.In the class, we experiment with different ways to engage the students. I've been able to hire Kathy Perkins, who co-teaches with me and helped create a completely original curriculum. We have 6 teaching assistants for almost 200 students, and they meet the students in small groups. We also have a homework workshop, where students get help with their assignments.The main thing is, We never go faster than the students. Most science courses streak through the course work. We make sure the kids have learned concepts before we go on. A lot of why science is so frightening to many is that teachers present material at several times the pace any reasonable person can absorb.Q. How do you know your students have mastered concepts?A. Through technology. Each student has a clicker at their desk -- which makes it possible for them to input onto a large computer screen at the front of the room. In the course of each class, we'll have "clicker questions" on the lecture material. The students then break into three-person "consensus groups" where they discuss the questions.With their clickers, they send in answers and then the whole class will see what's correct. When we're done, we call on people, asking them to justify what they've done. There's no memorization here. If there are a lot of incorrect responses, we slow down.Q. As I watched you teach earlier today, I had the feeling you were setting a tone that went, more or less, "Professor Wieman believes you can understand this." Is that what you're trying to do?A. Well, I believe they can. When I'm teaching I try to show how physics concepts work in everyday life. Microwave ovens? Everyone uses them. I show the physics principles involved. This morning, I talked about how atoms and electrons behave and how that can have all kinds of useful applications in making better lighting. This is not a part of any quantum mechanics course they'll be able to find elsewhere.Q. You won the 2001 Nobel Prize for helping to prove the existence of the Bose-Einstein condensate. This new form of matter was predicted by Einstein. Did you perform your work just to prove the master right?A. Eric Cornell and I worked on it because it was exciting. I wanted to make this new material, which would have really fascinating properties and would give us all kinds of interesting questions and behaviors to look at -- aspects of which Einstein hadn't looked at, at all. It was all about the physics.Now I should say that when it started to look feasible -- there was somewhat of a race to prove Bose-Einstein. There were other labs working on it. And O.K., I'm pretty competitive. Most very good scientists are competitive. We were pushing hard because there were other groups working in this area.Q. In 1995, when you proved the existence of the Bose-Einstein condensate, no one knew if it would have practical applications. Have any been found yet?A. We have some ideas, some possibilities. If you look at history, the laser took about 20 years to go from discovery to serious applications. So I don't think it's unreasonable that we're going to have to wait another 10 years. People are working on applications right now.Q. What kind of power has the Nobel Prize given you?A. Well, I have to be careful about what I say at faculty meetings. If I shoot my mouth off on a minor matter, it has real impact. That's not real power; it's a danger.I was hoping that the Nobel would give me the power to create this transformation model for education. It really hasn't, on the scale I expected.Last year, I used my sabbatical to write 29 grant proposals to change the way entire science departments teach, to develop materials that would allow people to do what we have without investing a lot of money. Except for one grant, they all got turned down. This makes me sometimes think I'm whistling in the dark.It's funny. If I were in Japan or India, I'd be a major figure in the public sphere. Here in the United States, I get more media calls about football scandals than educational reform. Maybe I'm not making my case to the right people. But I'm not giving up yet.