https://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/30/sports/basketball/clippers-move-on-without-donald-sterling.html
For Clippers, Transition in Decision Making Begins - The New York Times
Basketball,Los Angeles Clippers,Sterling  Donald,Rivers  Doc,Discrimination,Silver  Adam (1962- ),Roeser  Andy
April 29, 2014
3377
LOS ANGELES —  Soon after N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver handed down a lifetime ban to Donald Sterling on Tuesday, the Clippers’ website, the one still owned but no longer operated under the direction of Sterling, went black.There were no rosters, statistics, news, features, biographical information, promotions, schedules, community event listings or anything else, except a stark message in white letters against the black background: We Are One, with an interlocking L.A.C. logo.The symbolism was equally plain: It was there in black and white, unequivocal.The metaphor of choice, one used by the Los Angeles mayor, Eric Garcetti, among many others, was a heavy hammer that Silver had brought down on Sterling for racist remarks.But this blow immediately felt more transformative. Less than an hour after Silver stepped to the lectern in New York, the Clippers released a statement declaring: “We wholeheartedly support and embrace the decision by the N.B.A. and Commissioner Adam Silver today. Now the healing process begins.”But just who released the statement?“Doc and I approved that,” said Andy Roeser, the team president, referring to Doc Rivers, the Clippers’ coach and vice president of basketball operations.Roeser declined to answer further questions outside Staples Center. For years, he has run the business operation for Sterling, most prominently negotiating contracts. In a statement issued by the team Saturday, Roeser questioned the legitimacy of the recording and the motives of the woman Sterling directed not to publicly associate with black men.Rivers has little attachment to Sterling, arriving from Boston last summer and immediately distancing himself from Sterling on Saturday and refusing to meet with him Monday.Rivers, as he sat down for a news conference nearly two hours before Tuesday’s game against Golden State at Staples Center, exhaled deeply. He said he believed the decision had allowed his players, who were considering a boycott, to do the same.As for what it meant to the organization to operate without an owner in power, Rivers was uncertain.“A lifetime ban is a lifetime ban,” Rivers said. “And yes, I do think that’s the right decision. The next question is, where do we go? You think about coaching a team, and actually, I don’t know who to call if I need something, so the quicker that this is done, the better for everyone. Having said that, it’s going to take time, and we all have to be patient.”An example of how the Clippers operate came Monday, when they had meetings to address Sterling’s comments and answer questions about the league’s investigation. Rivers directed a meeting at the team’s facility in Playa Vista, Calif., while Roeser and the executives Carl Lahr and Christian Howard met in the team’s business offices at Staples Center.Though the team has improved in recent years, reaching the playoffs the past three seasons, the front office has not often functioned smoothly. The previous three general managers did not leave on good terms. Elgin Baylor and Mike Dunleavy sued Sterling — one for discrimination, the other for pay that he was owed — and Neil Olshey worked without a contract for nine months before leaving for a considerable raise in Portland.Just as Olshey had been promoted to replace Dunleavy, Gary Sacks — who worked under Olshey — was promoted to take Olshey’s place. Last season, personnel decisions were shared by Roeser, Sacks and Coach Vinny Del Negro, who was not rehired when his contract ran out despite leading the team to a franchise-record 56 victories.Working under Sacks is Sterling’s son-in-law, the director of basketball administration Eric Miller. Silver, at his news conference, said Sterling’s ban did not apply to anyone else in his family.For now, Sterling’s absence will have little effect. If few owners are as involved as the Dallas Mavericks’ Mark Cuban, who sits behind his team’s bench, hugged Vince Carter after his winning shot Saturday and often works out in the team’s weight room, then Sterling has been particularly distant in recent years.Sterling had an office at the team’s $50 million headquarters, which opened in 2009, but it was left vacant — used occasionally to conduct interviews until other employees were moved into it several years ago. He also did not have an office at Staples Center. For the most part, Sterling’s only involvement was to sign off on new contracts and trades.The league has told Clippers officials that it is working out how the team can manage ownership-level decisions that arise in the near future.At Staples Center, advertising banners were covered throughout the arena after more than a dozen sponsors cut ties with the team. As for how he will carry on, Rivers was succinct.“I’m going to do my job,” he said.