https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/12/world/europe/jeremy-corbyn-labour-party-leader-britain.html
Jeremy Corbyn, Unlikely Front-Runner for Labour Leader, Poised to Win Party Vote - The New York Times
Great Britain,Corbyn  Jeremy (1949- ),Elections,Debates (Political),Legislatures and Parliaments,Income Inequality,Labor and Jobs,Labour Party (Great Britain)
Sept. 11, 2015
6501
LONDON —  He wants to scrap Britain’s nuclear missiles, nationalize key industries and print money to bolster the economy. He is a critic of NATO and seems less than enthusiastic about the European Union.On Saturday, Jeremy Corbyn, a 66-year-old veteran left-winger, stands a good chance of being elected leader of Britain’s opposition Labour Party, sharpening the ideological debate within the country and highlighting the rise of anti-establishment politicians throughout Western democracies.If he wins, it will prove a remarkable moment in politics here, and a spectacular repudiation of former Prime Minister Tony Blair, the last Labour leader to win a national election and the architect of a strategy in which Labour abandoned much of its left-wing agenda and claimed the political center.Mr. Corbyn emerged as the leading candidate for party leader after Labour’s stinging defeat in the general election in May, when the governing Conservatives of Prime Minister David Cameron captured an outright Parliamentary majority. Initially viewed as a token candidate who could give voice to Labour’s far left, Mr. Corbyn has benefited from a fractured field of opponents and captured a wave of grass-roots enthusiasm for movements willing to challenge the status quo on issues like income inequality and foreign policy.Much like Senator Bernie Sanders, the Vermont independent who has ignited liberal passions in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination in the United States, Mr. Corbyn is promising radical approaches to longstanding problems. Under his leadership, Labour could become more like the new populist, leftist parties that have become prominent across Europe, including Syriza in Greece and Podemos in Spain.As Labour leader, Mr. Corbyn would be some way from power, but his views could influence policy, particularly on foreign affairs. Mr. Cameron, for example, wants to know the position of the new Labour leader before asking Parliament to authorize military strikes in Syria. Two years ago, Mr. Cameron lost a vote on the issue, and Mr. Corbyn was a staunch opponent.Then there is a looming referendum on whether Britain should stay in the European Union, due by the end of 2017, in which Labour’s role will be important. Though Mr. Corbyn has not said he wants Britain to leave the bloc, he has said he voted against British membership of the bloc’s forerunner in a plebiscite in 1975.And in Washington there may be unease at the prospect of the main British opposition party’s being led by a fierce critic of American foreign policy — one who, without endorsing their actions, has described Hamas and Hezbollah as “friends.”Hardly anyone contemplated such an outcome after the party’s previous leader,  Ed Miliband, led Labour to defeat in May’s general election, on a platform already seen as being to the left of Mr. Blair. After that electoral rebuff, most expected the right of the party to reclaim the leadership. Instead the Blairites have been trying frantically — apparently with little success — to derail Mr. Corbyn, a vegetarian teetotaler based in North London who made a career of rebelling against the party line and until now had little public profile outside of party activists.Steven Fielding, professor of political history at Nottingham University, said Mr. Corbyn’s rise had “taken everyone by surprise,” yet even opponents concede that his campaign has energized a cohort of enthusiastic, and often young, supporters.Such people, Mr. Corbyn said at a rally in London this week, had been “written off as being a nonpolitical generation, when in reality they were a political generation that politics had written off.”Although Britain’s economy is growing fast, Mr. Corbyn’s message has struck a chord with workers and families still feeling the aftershocks of Europe’s financial crisis of 2008.For many, prospects remain poor, wages low and employment insecure. Soaring housing prices in the south have left many locked out of the real estate market. Bankers remain the target of simmering resentment.Still, chance played a big part in Mr. Corbyn’s rise, not least because he had to be persuaded to run as the left’s leadership candidate, a position traditionally akin to that of a sacrificial victim.To stand, Mr. Corbyn needed 35 nominations from Labour lawmakers, and he scraped enough together only when several of those who did not support him decided he ought to be on the ballot to broaden the debate within the party. But, once there, he exploited a change of rules for the election of Labour leader, which had been devised to bolster the power of individual party members and curtail the influence of trade unions.For just three British pounds, about $4.60, anyone can become a “registered supporter” and take part in what has become something like an American-style primary. The party, which had around 187,000 members before the May general election, has gained more than 105,000 since, plus an additional 112,000 “registered supporters.” When those affiliated to the party, mainly through unions, are added, more than half a million people have a vote. The voting has been underway for several weeks.This system is now engulfed in controversy amid claims of organized efforts by hard-left supporters to register Corbyn voters and allegations that Conservative supporters have signed up to vote for Mr. Corbyn, calculating that this will sabotage Labour’s chances in the next election. Having won a five-year term in May, Mr. Cameron does not have to call another election until 2020.Perhaps most of all, Mr. Corbyn’s success reflects Labour’s internal failure to confront the toxic legacy of the war in Iraq, which Mr. Blair joined President George W. Bush in starting, and of the economic policies that many link to the financial crash.Mr. Corbyn’s opponents — Yvette Cooper, Andy Burnham and Liz Kendall — are all associated to varying degrees with a Blairite, centrist vision, yet none seem to have the charisma Mr. Blair possessed in 1994 when he won the party leadership.After a televised debate among the current four contenders, the Daily Telegraph commentator Dan Hodges declared Ms. Cooper the best performer, but lampooned her tendency to lapse into the type of robotic politician-style of speaking that has repelled many voters.“Each position she adopts,” Mr. Hodges wrote, “is carefully calculated to place herself in a position of perfect equilibrium between two other competing positions. ‘Tea or coffee, Yvette?’ ‘Well, I love tea. But I think it would be a serious mistake to ignore the importance of coffee.’ ”Mr. Fielding sees Mr. Corbyn’s success as a “sign of alienation from the system as it exists,” adding that his three opponents are viewed by many within the party as “Tory-lite,” a reference to Mr. Cameron’s Conservatives.The view among many supporters, Mr. Fielding added, was that “voting for Jeremy Corbyn might not work, but at least it is something that we believe in — and maybe it will work.”That chimes with the experience of the former Labour minister Chris Mullin, when he explained his reservations about Mr. Corbyn to party supporters.“Gently I pointed out,” Mr. Mullin wrote in The Guardian, “that a party led by Corbyn, saintly and decent man that he is, was likely to be unelectable. Which only met with the riposte that since the other three candidates appear to be unelectable too, why not go for the real thing?”Yet the real thing would take Labour further to the left than at any time since 1983, which history suggests would be a high risk.In that year, Mr. Corbyn and Mr. Blair entered Parliament, but Labour went down to a crushing defeat, and its manifesto was called “the longest suicide note in history.”