http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/03/world/africa/03iht-03afghan.9704363.html
Afghan police lay siege to home of former warlord - The New York Times
META-KEYWORDS NOT FOUND
Feb. 3, 2008
5834
KABUL — Dozens of armed police laid siege to the house of a powerful Uzbek leader, General Abdul Rashid Dostum, in the diplomatic district of the capital Sunday, after about 50 of his followers attacked and abducted a political rival and several others on Saturday night, leaving four of them hospitalized.Dostum is one of Afghanistan's most notorious former warlords. His militia has since been disarmed and he now heads a political party, Junbish-e-Milli, and holds a symbolic military post of Chief of Staff to the Commander-in-Chief. Yet he remains an intimidating presence on the political scene and has continued to use violence against critics and political rivals.The latest attack was on Akbar Bai, an ethnic Turkman and a former member of Dostum's party who broke with him last year, accusing him of crimes including murder of his fellow Turkmen. Some 50 to 60 people loyal to Dostum rushed on his house, beat up Bai and his son and shot his bodyguard, Salim Hassas, the police chief of Kabul said.Bai, his son and two bodyguards were admitted to the Kabul military hospital, a doctor on duty said on condition of anonymity. Bai was unconscious due to a severe blow to his head."Signs and symptoms shows that he was beaten up very badly, he was unconscious for a short period of time," said the doctor, who was not authorized to speak to the media."There is no doubt it was an illegal act," Zemarai Bashary, the Interior Ministry spokesman said of the attack on Bai. "We will send the case to the attorney general's office for follow up."He said that according to the victim's family, Dostum had been present during the attack on Bai and after beating the men they took them back to Dostum's house. By morning the police had the house surrounded with both sides aiming their weapons at each other from the rooftops.A legislator, Mohammad Alim Sayee, spoke to reporters outside the house on behalf of Dostum, and denied that he had broken into Bai's house. He blamed the government for plotting against the Uzbek leader."This is a conspiracy by the government against General Dostum," Sayee said. And he warned of instability if anything should happen to Dostum's control of northern Afghanistan. "If any harm occurs to Dostum, seven to eight provinces will turn against the government," he said.Sangar Rahimi contributed reporting from Kabul and Carlotta Gall contributed from Islamabad.