http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/18/world/africa/omar-hassan-al-bashir-sudan.html
U.S. Lags in Efforts to Rein In Omar al-Bashir of Sudan, Critics Say - The New York Times
Sudan,War Crimes  Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity,Bashir  Omar Hassan Al-,United States International Relations,Africa,Darfur (Sudan)
June 17, 2015
8718
When they heard the sound of galloping horses, or the roar of planes overhead, the women ran with children on their backs and hid in the hills.If they were lucky, they crossed a shallow stream into a neighboring country. Their villages were often set on fire, their livestock killed or stolen. The desert of western Sudan was littered with singed homes and the corpses of camels.That was Darfur, in western Sudan, more than 10 years ago, and it unleashed a vigorous international effort to rein in the country’s president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir.The United States imposed sanctions. More than 20,000 international peacekeepers poured into Darfur. The International Criminal Court indicted Mr. Bashir on charges of genocide, insisting that officials in countries around the world arrest him if he visited.It did little to cow Mr. Bashir.He has openly flouted the court’s arrest warrant, visiting South Africa just this week. His government dictates where peacekeepers in Sudan can go, while his own forces have mounted a new offensive in Darfur, displacing 78,000 people this year alone.All the while, Mr. Bashir has intensified his crackdown on rebel groups elsewhere in the country,  in the states of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. There, he has blocked aid workers from entering, bombed villages and chased people into the hills, according to rights groups, just as he did in Darfur a decade ago.If the United States once led the international campaign against Mr. Bashir, even its most generous critics say, it has run out of ideas lately — or given up trying — to stop massacres in Sudan altogether.“There are competing priorities and other crises that have driven Sudan down on the hierarchy of interests,” said John Prendergast, who worked briefly in the State Department and now runs a human rights group called the Enough Project. “We don’t have fresh, original ideas on leading the international community.”One of those competing priorities is that the United States now relies on Sudan for intelligence cooperation, which, as Mr. Prendergast put it, “undermines the ability of the United States to take a clean shot at this guy.”Sudanese ministers have visited Washington in recent months, and in its latest report on counterterrorism, the State Department says that Mr. Bashir’s government has taken steps to restrain jihadist groups, including Al Qaeda, from using its territory as a logistics base.“The government of Sudan remained a generally cooperative counterterrorism partner and continued to take action to address threats to U.S. interests and personnel in Sudan,” it said in the report.Mr. Bashir has made overtures to the West. His latest diplomatic counterstrike was to declare his allegiance to a vital ally of the United States in the Middle East: Saudi Arabia.Sudan joined the Saudi-led coalition in support of Yemen’s embattled government in March. In so doing, it signaled, publicly at least, that it was repudiating its longstanding alliance with Saudi Arabia’s regional rival, Iran.Mr. Bashir has also managed to keep many African leaders on his side, visiting countries like Nigeria and Kenya without being arrested, despite the International Criminal Court charges.But he has shown little interest in the peace talks mediated by the African Union to find a political settlement in Darfur, and he has not welcomed a United Nations-African Union peacekeeping force in his country.Mr. Bashir has said publicly they should go home soon. The United States continues to push in the United Nations Security Council to ensure that peacekeepers do not pull back from Darfur. The Security Council is expected to decide on that matter by the end of this month.Even if they stay, Mr. Bashir has succeeded in severely curtailing what the peacekeepers can do, where they can go and even what kind of helicopters they can bring in.Those restrictions came into sharp relief in the fall, after Sudanese forces blocked peacekeepers from investigating reports of a mass rape. Human Rights Watch concluded that Sudanese soldiers had raped more than 200 women and girls in a village called Tabit; the youngest victim, the group found, was 7 years old.United Nations officials say peacekeepers are blocked at checkpoints. Sometimes Mr. Bashir’s military planes circle overhead, as a means to intimidate.The 15,000 peacekeepers posted in Darfur have little visibility into the worst atrocities now. United Nations officials say that Mr. Bashir’s government has not allowed them to go to areas of fresh fighting, including the Jebel Marra mountain range. No one knows exactly what is happening there.The assistant secretary general for peacekeeping affairs at the United Nations, Edmond Mulet, told the Security Council last week that there were unconfirmed reports of 130,000 displaced civilians in the area, mostly in the Jebel Marra. More than 2.5 million people remain displaced across Darfur.“There is also significant concern about reports of indiscriminate attacks against civilians, as well as other violations of human rights and international humanitarian law,” he said.There is even less information about what is happening in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States. Mr. Bashir does not let aid workers into those areas, let alone United Nations peacekeepers. In one measure of how terrified civilians are in Southern Kordofan, an estimated 100,000 have fled to war-torn South Sudan, according to the United Nations.Human Rights Watch said in April that there was evidence that Mr. Bashir’s forces had dropped cluster munitions in parts of Southern Kordofan. Bombings in civilian areas, the group said, have taken a grievous toll on children, and it cited one episode in which five children burned to death after a bomb set their house on fire.Alex Neve, secretary general of Amnesty International Canada, said after a visit to the area in early June that attacks were intensifying.“The signature tactic continues to be barrel bombs out of Antonovs,” he said, referring to aircraft. The goal, he added, is to “overwhelmingly terrorize the civilian population.”Human Rights Watch and Amnesty have called for Security Council action, including a United Nations investigation of human rights abuses in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. They have been unsuccessful so far. China and Russia remain important allies of Mr. Bashir.More surprisingly, critics of the Obama administration say, Washington has failed to keep pressure on Mr. Bashir. At the very least, Mr. Prendergast says, the administration could be smarter about applying targeted sanctions against Mr. Bashir and his top lieutenants, including trying to stop them from selling what Mr. Prendergast’s group calls “conflict gold” mined from Darfur.The United States Mission to the United Nations was unavailable for comment.Ahmed Hussain Adam, a Sudanese political activist who is now a fellow at Cornell University, pressed the Obama administration to lean on Mr. Bashir’s defenders in the Arab world, including Saudi Arabia, to nudge him to leave office.“While I appreciate the effort of the United States to help the Sudanese, especially at the humanitarian level, I can say there is no clear vision or strategy to deal with Sudan,” Mr. Adam said. “They are supporting the status quo.”Eric Reeves, a professor of English at Smith College who has spent over a decade urging the American government to pay attention to massacres in Sudan, is less forgiving of the American position. The United States is allowing Mr. Bashir to carry on, he argues, for his usefulness in checking terrorist groups in a delicate part of Africa.“It has run out of the will to do something about incredible ongoing human suffering and destruction,” he said.