https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/06/us/politics/unlikely-holdout-underscores-challenge-for-senate-health-bill.html
Unlikely Holdout Underscores Challenge for Senate Health Bill - The New York Times
Senate,Health Insurance and Managed Care,Republican Party,Law and Legislation,Moran  Jerry (1954- ),Kansas,United States Politics and Government,Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010)
July 6, 2017
1031
PALCO, Kan. — Cheryl Hofstetter Duffy began by telling Senator Jerry Moran that she was a breast cancer survivor. Then she asked why the debate over the Affordable Care Act was focused on repealing and replacing the law, rather than simply making it better.When she finished, the crowd jammed into a community center on Thursday applauded. Mr. Moran, a Kansas Republican who came out last week against the Senate leadership’s repeal bill, picked up on the sentiment, lamenting that both parties were locked in opposition over health care, with Republicans pursuing repeal and Democrats saying, he said, “Not one inch are we giving.”“And so the rhetoric puts us into the corners of the ring,” he said, “and never a meeting of the minds.”For about 90 minutes on a hot summer day, this tiny town in northwest Kansas, with fewer than 300 people, took on an improbable role at the center of the national debate over the future of health care. Mr. Moran did something that almost none of his Republican colleagues are doing over the Fourth of July recess: He stood in front of his constituents at a town hall-style meeting.Mr. Moran faced probing questions about health care, exposing constituents’ deep concerns about the bill, though the gathering was notably polite. Dressed crisply in a suit, white shirt and red tie, Mr. Moran stood at the front of the packed room with the crowd of more than 100 spilling outdoors through an open doorway in the back.A few feet from the senator, a woman in a pink Planned Parenthood T-shirt held a poster that offered a reminder of the backlash Mr. Moran and his colleagues risk: “When you lose your health care remember who took it away,” it said, showing caricatures of the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, who is pushing the bill; President Trump; and Speaker Paul D. Ryan.Mr. Moran represents a state Mr. Trump won by about 20 percentage points. He won his own re-election by an almost two-to-one ratio. He does not have to contend with pressure from a governor who has been publicly critical of the bill, unlike colleagues from states like Nevada and Ohio. And yet he has become an unlikely holdout as Mr. McConnell tries to find the votes to pass the measure, starting next week.The reservations expressed by a reliable Republican vote like Mr. Moran underline how daunting it will be for Mr. McConnell to work out a bill that 50 Republican senators can support.In Palco — about halfway between Kansas City and Denver, and near where Mr. Moran grew up — the senator outlined how he was assessing the bill. Would it make premiums more affordable while still preserving coverage for people with pre-existing conditions? Would it help or harm the availability of health care in communities across Kansas?“I am a product of rural Kansas,” he said. “I understand the value of a hospital in your community, of a physician in your town, of a pharmacy on Main Street.”The debate over repealing the health law is playing out in a year when Kansas has been buffeted by political turmoil and blunt challenges to conservative policy making. After years of budget woes, state lawmakers voted to reverse course from the sweeping tax cuts championed by Gov. Sam Brownback, a Republican.They also voted to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, driven in part by concerns about the financial viability of rural hospitals. Thirty-one states have expanded Medicaid under the health law. But Mr. Brownback vetoed the measure, and lawmakers failed to override his veto.“What we learned from Kansas is that policy matters,” said David Jordan, the executive director of the Alliance for a Healthy Kansas, which pushed to expand Medicaid. “When policy becomes too ideologically driven and strays away from what’s good for the people you serve, people are going to start to see that.”Now, Mr. Jordan said, people are coming to the same conclusion about the Senate bill. “People realize that this is going to mean that their hospital may close, that they may have to pay more for coverage,” he said.After Mr. McConnell scrapped plans for a vote last week, Mr. Moran announced that he opposed the measure, saying it “missed the mark for Kansans.”Mr. Moran, who was chairman of the Senate Republicans’ campaign arm when they won control of the chamber in 2014, is considered a durable party loyalist.“If you lose Jerry Moran, you’ve lost part of the mainstream of the party,” said Burdett Loomis, a political-science professor at the University of Kansas. “If guys like him start unraveling, not just on health care but on other issues, McConnell has no chance of controlling that caucus.”But Mr. Moran, in opposing the bill, risks alienating conservatives — though a primary challenge in 2022 is hard to imagine.“I think for Senator Moran and others like him, it’s not enough to say, ‘Well, I don’t like the current bill,’” said former Representative Tim Huelskamp, a Republican who succeeded Mr. Moran in representing Kansas’ vast First District. “Tell me how you’re going to get to the point where the bulk of Obamacare is repealed, and when will you get it done?”“We’ve waited six months plus seven years,” he added, “and now it’s time to get some action done.”Kathleen Sebelius, a former Democratic governor of Kansas who was secretary of health and human services under President Barack Obama, expressed skepticism that Mr. Moran would remain opposed to the bill.“I’m afraid at the end of the day, he will vote for some kind of legislation,” she said, adding of the bill’s being revised, “A really awful bill, if it gets a little less awful, is still awful.”Kansas’ other Republican senator, Pat Roberts, offered an assessment of the Senate bill strikingly different from Mr. Moran’s: Kansas, he said, “fared well under this draft.” Before the recess, according to The Associated Press, he offered an evocative description of how Republican senators were trying to come to agreement.“Once in Glacier National Park, I saw two porcupines making love,” Mr. Roberts said. “I’m assuming they produced smaller porcupines. They produced something. It has to be done carefully. That’s what we’re doing now.”Mr. Moran and Mr. Roberts have faced pressure on multiple fronts — not just from voters eager for the health law to remain in place, but also from medical professionals and state legislators.Dozens of members of the Kansas Legislature, including numerous Republicans, signed a letter to Mr. Moran and Mr. Roberts saying that the repeal bill that passed the House in May would have “a profound negative impact on Kansas.” And hospitals, family physicians and other health care providers urged the senators to oppose the Senate bill.But it remains to be seen whether Mr. Moran will stick with his opposition.“I want to see if he’s actually going to have the nerve to do what he should do, or if he’s just going to be a puppy dog and follow along with what the Republicans ask,” said Armin Kelly, a retired veterinarian at the meeting. “I think I know how he feels. It’s just whether he has the fortitude to stand up and do what he needs to do.”Margy Stewart, a retired English professor, drove about three hours on Thursday morning to attend the meeting, and spoke approvingly of Mr. Moran’s stance against the bill. “Senator Moran is clearly showing that he is not a rigid ideologue,” she said.But she admitted that she was worried that might not last.“That’s one reason I felt it was important to be here,” she said.