https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/30/opinion/tillerson-ivanka-human-rights-trafficking.html
A Sign of Hope From Mr. Tillerson - The New York Times
Tillerson  Rex W,State Department,Human Rights and Human Rights Violations,Human Trafficking,Trump  Ivanka,United States Politics and Government,United States International Relations
June 30, 2017
5229
When the State Department rolled out its annual human rights report in March, cataloging abuses in countries around the world, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson was nowhere to be found. Unlike his recent predecessors, he didn’t introduce the findings at a press briefing; in fact, there was no briefing, just an anonymous senior official taking questions by telephone.Flash forward to this week when another annual report — this time on a modern form of slavery known as human trafficking — was released with real fanfare. Not only was there an on-camera press briefing, but Mr. Tillerson was the headliner, joined by Ivanka Trump, President Trump’s daughter and adviser, who helped draw an overflow media crowd to the event.Whether this means Mr. Trump himself will now give greater priority to human rights remains to be seen. Still, it seemed a hopeful sign that Mr. Tillerson and Ms. Trump chose to put their own political weight behind the report, and more broadly, the American effort to press other governments to improve anti-trafficking laws and prosecutions. Human trafficking is a 21st-century scourge, enslaving millions of vulnerable people, including many children, in sex networks and forced labor.Mr. Tillerson, making the case for American engagement, said trafficking “breeds corruption; it undermines rule of law; it erodes the core values that underpin a civil society.” Ms. Trump said combating trafficking is in the country’s “moral and our strategic interest” and is a “major foreign policy priority” for the administration. More than that, as the mother of small children, she said, she saw the report as a “clarion call to action in defense of the vulnerable, the abused and the exploited.”Such reports, which rank countries in four groups according to their success in combating trafficking, inevitably involve political calculations as officials calibrate the costs of criticizing other governments. This year, the State Department’s least defensible decisions involved excluding Myanmar, Iraq and Afghanistan from an auxiliary list of countries banned under a special law from certain American military assistance because their armed forces recruited child soldiers. Iraq and Myanmar were on the list in 2016; Afghanistan was not. The text of the report mentioned violations by all three countries. In the overall trafficking rankings, the report gave better marks to Afghanistan and Myanmar, while still acknowledging their failings; Iraq was downgraded.The report also served as a means for the administration to ratchet up pressure on China, which, in a change from 2016, was named one of the worst human trafficking offenders, along with Iran, Russia, North Korea and 19 others. President Trump is already angry that China has not done more to force North Korea to give up its nuclear weapons program; Mr. Tillerson argued that the proceeds North Korea received from human trafficking could be used to finance that program and further threaten American national security. Up to 80,000 North Koreans are forced to work in construction, mining and food processing jobs, primarily in China and Russia.Despite the report’s message to China and other offenders and Mr. Tillerson’s and Ms. Trump’s words, the administration’s broader human rights record has been miserable, largely because of the man in the Oval Office. Start with Mr. Trump’s embrace of autocrats from Russia’s Vladimir Putin, blamed for the deaths of journalists and political opponents; Egypt’s Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, who has jailed thousands of dissidents; and the Philippines’ Rodrigo Duterte, who has killed thousands of Filipinos in a murderous crackdown on drug addicts and dealers.Add to that Mr. Trump’s failure to discuss human rights in Saudi Arabia, which limits the freedoms of women and prosecutes a war in Yemen that has become a humanitarian catastrophe; his refusal to close the prison at Guantánamo Bay; and his attempts to ban all Muslims from the United States, including refugees. Questions about labor conditions at Chinese factories that make shoes for Ms. Trump’s brand have also been raised.Does this administration see promoting human rights as part of America’s role in the world, or not? Given all the mixed messages, it’s a fair question. Here is one way to begin to answer it in the affirmative: Liu Xiaobo, a Nobel Peace Prize-winning democracy activist jailed for 11 years, has cancer. Mr. Trump and Mr. Tillerson should urge Beijing to let him go, to seek treatment wherever he and his wife can find it.