http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/26/world/europe/kenyan-leader-william-ruto-must-attend-most-of-hague-trial.html
Kenyan Deputy Leader Dealt Blow at Hague  - The New York Times
Kenya,Ruto  William,Kenyatta  Uhuru Muigai,War Crimes  Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity,International Criminal Court
Oct. 25, 2013
8379
PARIS —  The International Criminal Court on Friday told Kenya’s deputy president, William Ruto, that he must attend most of his trial at The Hague, overturning a ruling that let him be present only on key occasions.The decision by the appeals judges suggests a precedent for its handling of the case against the Kenyan president, Uhuru Kenyatta, who had also been told that he could be absent for long periods during his trial, scheduled to begin Nov. 12. Mr. Ruto’s trial has already begun. On Friday, Mr. Kenyatta asked for his trial to be postponed, citing the “national and international crisis” set off by a deadly attack on a Nairobi mall last month, his lawyers said.Both men have been accused of crimes against humanity in connection with the violence after the disputed 2007 Kenyan election, which set off ethnic clashes across the country that killed more than 1,100 people and displaced 600,000.The two leaders have mobilized the African Union to support them in a demand that their trials be postponed. The African Union has submitted a formal request to the United Nations Security Council, which can defer the proceedings for a year. There has been no public response thus far.Once political opponents, Mr. Kenyatta, a prominent member of the Kikuyu ethnic group, and Mr. Ruto, a leader of the Kalenjin group, teamed up in the most recent election, with their Jubilee Alliance winning the vote in March. That election proceeded relatively peacefully. Many people fear that the prosecutions in The Hague could upset Kenya’s fragile balance and set off renewed violence.In its ruling Friday, the Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Court said the trial judges had been too lenient with Mr. Ruto and had given him a “blanket excusal,” making “his absence the general rule and his presence an exception.”Quoting from the court’s statute, which states that “the accused shall be present during the trial,” the appeals judges said that Mr. Ruto should file a separate request each time he wanted to skip the proceedings and that the trial judges should decide these case by case.However, the appeals judges said the trial judges could look for alternative solutions, like changing the schedule or adjourning the trial temporarily.Last month, judges at the court took the unusual step of suspending Mr. Ruto’s trial for nine days so that he could return home to assist in the government’s response after gunmen stormed the Westgate  shopping mall in Nairobi, the Kenyan capital, and killed scores of people.The African Union has said that the attack showed that Kenya “is a front-line state in the fight against terrorism” and that the trials would prevent Mr. Kenyatta and Mr. Ruto from “fulfilling their constitutional responsibilities.”In their decision, the appeals judges ignored an unusual plea from five African countries — Burundi, Eritrea, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda — asking them in a letter to be “flexible” and to excuse Mr. Ruto from being present for most proceedings.Lawyers at The Hague said it was the first time that governments had openly tried to influence a judicial decision in a case to which they were not a party and that did not involve their citizens. They said the request could be considered inappropriate and was an apparent threat to the independence of the court.Since their election this year, Mr. Kenyatta and Mr. Ruto have stepped up a campaign to have their cases dropped and mobilized a great majority of African leaders at two summit conferences. Last month, Kenyan lawmakers voted to withdraw their country from the International Criminal Court, in a sign of discontent over the prosecutions.The prosecution has not said whether it would appeal the particularly lenient rules for trial attendance for Mr. Kenyatta. An appeal against similar rules for Mr. Ruto led to Friday’s ruling.Mr. Ruto’s trial began last month, and he has been present except for the period when the trial was suspended during the Westgate shopping mall crisis.