http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/25/nyregion/brooklyn-prosecutor-emerges-as-shrewd-victor-in-akai-gurley-case.html
Ken Thompson, Brooklyn Prosecutor, Emerges as Shrewd Victor in Akai Gurley Case - The New York Times
Murders  Attempted Murders and Homicides,Thompson  Kenneth P,Liang  Peter (1987- ),Gurley  Akai,Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Brooklyn (NYC),Police Department (NYC)
March 24, 2016
7374
Ken Thompson, the Brooklyn district attorney, dropped a memorable line at the end of his letter this week recommending no prison time for Peter Liang, the former New York City police officer convicted of manslaughter last month in the fatal shooting of an unarmed man in a housing project stairwell.“There are no winners here,” he wrote.Mr. Thompson was referring primarily to the two chief players in the tragic drama: Mr. Liang’s victim, Akai Gurley — “a completely innocent man who lost his life for no reason” — and Mr. Liang himself, who has already lost his job and who stands to lose his freedom when he is sentenced next month.But along the way the case has had winners, and losers, though it has at times been hard to tell them apart. When Mr. Thompson’s letter was released on Wednesday, Mr. Gurley’s family and criminal-justice reform activists expressed outrage, just several weeks after having applauded Mr. Liang’s conviction, and before that his indictment. In a stark but mirroring contrast, the city’s police unions and many in its Chinese-American community denounced the indictment and conviction, but they are now praising prosecutors and cheering the prospect that Mr. Liang, who is of Chinese heritage, might avoid prison.If the best settlements are those in which each side leaves unhappy, then it could be that Mr. Thompson has himself emerged a winner, if a battered one, near the end of the sort of polarizing police misconduct case that can define a district attorney’s career. A first-term prosecutor with electoral potential, he had much to lose by even pursuing the case, which was fraught from the start with legal hurdles and political pitfalls.A blameless man had been killed by the police, but the officer was not one with a history of violence or who had obviously acted out of malice. Instead, he was a rookie officer on a dangerous assignment who had only recently left the Police Academy.In the end, Mr. Thompson has arguably managed to get the best he could: praise and fury from nearly everyone involved.What is all but impossible to divine is how, or even whether, Mr. Thompson, a Democrat, weighed the unofficial but unavoidable considerations: the politics of a diverse borough that made him the first black district attorney in Brooklyn’s history; the tension that prosecutors face in weighing justice and mercy; and the powerful influence of the Police Department, whose officers work closely with him and his staff and which once counted his mother among its ranks.Or perhaps, Mr. Thompson, who declined to be interviewed for this article, just went with his gut.“Prosecutors face enormous pressure,” said Representative Kathleen M. Rice, a Democrat who once served as the Nassau County district attorney. “If you’re not prepared to be disliked by one or both sides in a criminal case, then being a D.A. is probably not the job for you.”From the moment in November 2014 that Mr. Thompson learned of Mr. Gurley’s death — by a ricocheting bullet in a dark stairwell of the Louis H. Pink Houses in East New York — he found himself confronting bedeviling facts: the innocent victim, the broken lights in the notoriously dangerous housing project, and the inexperience of Mr. Liang and his partner.On the other hand, as Mr. Thompson’s prosecutors pointedly noted at the trial, Mr. Liang and his partner failed to assist Mr. Gurley even after they realized the bullet had actually struck someone.Politically, Mr. Thompson faced a mix of competing constituencies, none of which were timid in expressing their opinions. Much of the police force, which carries out most of the investigative legwork for a district attorney’s prosecutions, said Mr. Liang should not be indicted. Large swaths of the city’s growing Asian-American population expressed the same sentiment.At the same time, the shooting came only four months after the death of Eric Garner, another unarmed black man, who was killed in an encounter with the police on Staten Island. The case fueled protests in New York and across the country, especially after a grand jury declined to indict the officer who had placed Mr. Garner in a chokehold, which was a cause of his death.Adding to the already considerable pressure was Mr. Thompson’s own biography: He was both Brooklyn’s first black district attorney, who had campaigned as a reformer promising to restore a sense of fairness to communities of color, and the son of a police officer who understood, from personal experience, the exigencies of police work.“He was in an extremely difficult spot because he had to reconcile a number of different interests,” said Alan Vinegrad, a former federal prosecutor who worked with Mr. Thompson in the late 1990s on the Abner Louima police brutality case. “Forget about the politics, strictly from a do-the-right thing perspective, it was hard to achieve justice for the victim.”For nearly a year and a half, Mr. Thompson has been saying that his decisions in the Gurley case have been driven by the evidence, not politics. And yet it remains that the office of district attorney is an elected one. Even many of his loudest critics, including those, like Mr. Liang’s lawyer, who thought that an indictment should never have been brought, have said his sentencing decision was at the very least reasonable.Mr. Thompson’s letter is only a recommendation, and the final sentencing decision rests with Justice Danny K. Chun of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, who could give Mr. Liang as much as 15 years in prison.But by urging only probation and a brief period of house arrest, Mr. Thompson, wittingly or not, has created a situation in which a sentence that includes any time behind bars could seem a tough penalty and perhaps mollify some of those who opposed his recommendation.Whatever political fallout there is from his decision is likely to emerge only in time as he seeks re-election or tries for higher office. As People v. Liang returns again to the courthouse for the sentencing on April 14, legal questions will take precedence.“Did the officer win? No,” Mr. Vinegrad said. “Did the victim win? Obviously not. Did the various communities on either side win? Not really. Who was the winner? You could argue it was the justice system.”