https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/09/world/middleeast/egypts-parliament-prepares-for-session-with-some-familiar-names.html
Egypt’s Parliament Prepares for Session With Some Familiar Names - The New York Times
Sisi  Abdel Fattah el-,Mubarak  Hosni,Egypt,Legislatures and Parliaments,Muslim Brotherhood (Egypt),Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria
Jan. 8, 2016
8243
ISMAILIA, Egypt — As his jeep careened along a narrow country road, swerving to avoid slower traffic, Talaat el-Sewedy, a newly elected parliamentarian, juggled two cellphones as he fielded a barrage of demands from supporters.One woman sought money to refurbish the bathroom of her new apartment. Several constituents asked for government jobs. An elderly man, who said he was on his deathbed, wanted to get his police officer son transferred to a better district. A military general needed to find a suitable bride for his son.“You see,” said Mr. Sewedy, a loquacious, chain-smoking politician, in a brief pause between calls. “I am a matchmaker, too.”That’s the brand of politics — a mix of patronage, pork barrel and influence-wielding — that inspired many Egyptians to oust Mr. Sewedy’s former patron, President Hosni Mubarak, from power five years ago. But when the country’s new Parliament is seated on Sunday for the first time in three years, what is striking is how many of the old faces — and old practices — will be back.Although some of the most reviled Mubarak-era figures were barred from running in the elections, which took place over several rounds from October to December, several other former officials, or their close relatives, have seen their political fortunes restored. Osama Heikel, a former information minister, has a seat, as does the son of Kamal al-Shazli, a former ruling party power broker. So does the sister of Hisham Talaat Moustafa, a real estate tycoon who became one of the country’s richest men under Mr. Mubarak, and who is in prison for murdering his girlfriend, a Suzanne Tamim, a Lebanese pop star.President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi says this is part of Egypt’s democratic blossom, reversing the effects of the military takeover that brought him to power in 2013. With 596 seats, the Parliament is the largest in Egypt’s history; at least 19 parties are represented in the chamber including more women and Coptic Christians than ever before.To critics, though, the Parliament is no more than window-dressing for his authoritarian rule — a fractured and toothless institution that marks the culmination of five years of sometimes bloody political tumult, and that represents the dashed hopes of a truly representative democracy. “We’re seeing the social reproduction of the old system in the worst ways, and the emergence of a new kind of establishment,” said Rabab al-Mahdi, a political science lecturer at the American University in Cairo.Certainly, the prospects for a vigorous legislature that has the authority to actually address the serious economic, social and security challenges facing Egypt are, at best, weak. The election was characterized by candidates competing to express their support for Mr. Sisi. The largest party — the Free Egyptians party, led by Naguib Sawiris, a telecommunications tycoon — holds just 11 percent of seats; more than half of the new legislators do not belong to any party.Businessmen, former military officials and pro-government media personalities are expected to predominate.Outside Parliament, the Muslim Brotherhood opposition party has been outlawed and tens of thousands of people including journalists and activists have been jailed.“This Parliament is the creation of the security services and the financial elites that have bought into Egypt’s new autocracy,” said Amr Hamzawy, a political scientist who was elected to the last Parliament, in 2012, but who left Egypt last year for the United States, citing harassment and fear of imprisonment. “There are no politics, no ideas.”For television audiences, one of the best recognizable faces in Parliament will be Abdel Rahim Ali, a talk-show host who has courted notoriety for broadcasting recordings of private telephone conversations among activists who played prominent roles in ousting Mr. Mubarak, and who Mr. Ali tends to portray as disloyal Egyptians who are in the pay of Western powers.At his wood-paneled office in Cairo, where Mr. Ali was elected to Parliament in the first round of voting, he presented himself as a loyal exemplar of the Sisi era and defended the contentious broadcasts.“There are people who want to destroy this country, make it like Syria and Iraq,” he said, in a reference to the banned Muslim Brotherhood. “The military, security forces and judiciary want to defend it, and we have to stand by them.”He has amassed a store of 5,000 phone recordings, he said, and listened to some every night. He intends to continue airing them on television during his time in Parliament. “My ears hurt,” he said.Asked where he had he obtained the private recordings, Mr. Ali gave a mischievous grin and pointed a finger toward the ceiling. “Allah,” he said.Operating in a straitjacketed political environment is nothing new to the Mubarak-era politicians, many of them consummate deal-makers who built their empires on their family names, their wealth and their ability to provide services to supporters in the most delicate circumstances.As he drove through the countryside, Mr. Sewedy, who comes from one of Egypt’s wealthiest industrialist families, received a call informing him that one of his supporters had been jailed. Mr. Sewedy called the investigating police officer, who provided details: The man had presented himself to a woman as a fortune teller, then proposed to banish her evil spirits by having sex with her.“How can we solve this?” Mr. Sewedy asked the officer over the phone. “This man is very important to me. His lawyer is on the way to you. Figure it out.”Mr. Sewedy said that catering to his constituents, and not the name of his leader, was the key to his success. Nonetheless, he felt that the stigma of his previous association with Mr. Mubarak was finally dissipating.“People call us felool,” he said, employing a derisive term used by some Egyptians for Mubarak-era cronies. “But I am proud to be felool. There’s nothing wrong with it.”Things are also looking up for Mr. Mubarak’s family. Although Mr. Mubarak, 87, remains in detention in a military hospital, his sons, Gamal and Alaa, were released in October after several stints in jail for corruption.Mr. Sisi, who is expected to address the Parliament in the coming week, argues that it will hold his government accountable. That resolve will be tested in one of Parliament’s first official duties — the scrutiny of several hundred presidential decrees, issued under Mr. Sisi, which must be passed into law or rejected in just 15 days.Parliament’s bigger challenge, though, will be to overcome endemic apathy. The last election was the eighth time Egyptians have gone to the polls since 2011; voter turnout at 28 percent was about half the level of the previous election. “People are exhausted,” Ms. Mahdi, the political scientist, said.“If you say to them, ‘Let’s topple the regime,’ the answer is, ‘What next?’ ” she said. “And that’s a question that we, as activists or opposition, don’t have an answer to.”