https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/25/world/asia/hong-kong-independence-chris-patten.html
Calls for Hong Kong Independence Hurt Push for Democracy, Ex-Governor Says - The New York Times
Patten  Christopher F,Yau Wai-ching (1991- ),Leung  Sixtus,Youngspiration (Hong Kong Political Party),Politics and Government,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Hong Kong,China
Nov. 25, 2016
7821
HONG KONG — The last British colonial governor of Hong Kong criticized two politicians advocating independence for the Chinese territory on Friday, offering a high-profile rebuke to a nascent separatist movement struggling to secure formal representation in the local legislature.Independence for Hong Kong “is not going to happen,” and the campaign for it is “something which dilutes support for democracy,” said the former governor, Christopher F. Patten, who pushed for greater democracy in Hong Kong in the years before it returned to Chinese rule in 1997. He delivered his remarks in a speech on Friday before the Foreign Correspondents’ Club.Without naming them, he criticized Yau Wai-ching, 25, and Sixtus Leung, 30, who were barred from taking their seats as the city’s first openly separatist legislators after they declared allegiance to a “Hong Kong nation” and inserted anti-China snubs into their oaths of office.“I had great admiration and still have great admiration for those who campaign for democracy, but not those whose campaign dilutes support for democracy and makes a mockery of a serious political argument,” Mr. Patten said, drawing a distinction between campaigns for Hong Kong’s independence from China and those calling for freer elections, including the largely peaceful protests of 2014, which shut down parts of Hong Kong for months.“Two years ago, many brave young people in Hong Kong established moral high ground about democracy and governance, and I think it would be a tragedy if that high ground was lost because of a few antics about so-called independence for Hong Kong,” he said.In response to the criticism, Mr. Leung, himself a participant in the protests known as the Umbrella Movement, argued that the past two years were proof that whatever moral ground they took did not work “when you are negotiating with the immoral and authoritarian Chinese Communist Party.”Support for greater autonomy and even independence for the city has grown as the Chinese government refuses to grant the protesters’ demands for greater popular participation in choosing Hong Kong’s leader. That was enough to sweep Ms. Yau and Mr. Leung to victory in the first major elections since the 2014 protests.Mr. Patten’s remarks delivered a further blow to Ms. Yau and Mr. Leung, members of the new Youngspiration party, after a local court declared their seats vacant last Tuesday. The legislature also asked them each to repay nearly $130,000 they received for salaries and expenses in the weeks after their election, when they were allowed to set up offices.Ms. Yau’s and Mr. Leung’s unorthodox oath-taking prompted a rare legal intervention by the Chinese government that critics said challenged the independence of Hong Kong’s judiciary, which already had a case pending over their qualifications as legislators. Mr. Patten echoed such concerns about interference by Beijing in Hong Kong, which was promised considerable legal autonomy under the agreement returning it to Chinese rule. Even though he criticized the two, he said that “maybe it would be better” if the Chinese government left the case for the local courts to decide.Hong Kong’s High Court will decide next week whether to accept Ms. Yau’s and Mr. Leung’s application to appeal the decision. If that fails, a by-election would be held to fill their seats.