https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/23/world/europe/romans-put-little-faith-in-mayor-as-their-ancient-city-degrades.html
Romans Put Little Faith in Mayor as Their Ancient City Degrades - The New York Times
Rome (Italy),Italy,Marino  Ignazio,Mayors,Politics and Government,Corruption (Institutional)
July 22, 2015
1644
ROME —  The grass in some public parks sways knee high. Disgruntled subway workers have slowed service to a crawl. Fire has rendered the city’s largest airport crammed and chaotic. The arrests of public officials pile up, revealing mob infiltration of the city government.It all adds up to what Romans call “degrado” — the degradation of services, buildings and their standard of living — and the general sense that their ancient city, even more than usual, is falling apart.Not all those troubles are necessarily the fault of Mayor Ignazio Marino, a former surgeon whose own integrity remains unblemished. But, strangely enough, in Rome, his decency is not necessarily seen as part of the solution, either.Born in Genoa and trained in the United States, Mr. Marino took office in 2013 as the unlikely leader of a city famed for its political intrigues. His outsider résumé initially appealed to Romans hoping for an honest broker with Anglo-Saxon credentials who could clean up their city.Today, Mr. Marino finds himself under political siege in the city he vowed to save from itself. Italy’s news media lampoons him as an honest man in over his head, or as one newspaper called him, a Forrest Gump.“His virtue is also his main problem: He is not connected to all the rotten Roman relationships,” said Carlo Bonini, an investigative journalist with La Repubblica, a daily newspaper. “He knows the world he operates in too little.”Romans are notorious for their cynicism about politics, their resignation in the face of antiquated services and sprawling bureaucracy, and their abundance of ways to complain about it. As the problems mount, residents are voicing more frustration with services inadequate to serve the city’s roughly 2.8 million people.“At times I do wonder whether this is a first- or third-world service,” said Liliana Marelli, 64. She was sweating as she rode a city bus with no air-conditioning during a recent heat wave.In recent months, the situation in the capital has grown so dire that Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, himself a reformer, has expressed concern, fueling speculation that the city cabinet will be disbanded or that the mayor might be prodded to step down.Perhaps most damning for the mayor has been the slow-bleeding “Mafia Capitale” investigation, which has exposed tainted bidding for city contracts on a number of services, including refugee centers and sanitation. Even for a country more than accustomed to such scandal, the revelations have come as a shock.In the south, as well as in some northern regions, investigations have revealed that organized crime groups such as the Camorra, the ’Ndrangheta and the Mafia still exert surreptitious influence and dominate public bidding.But Rome was supposed to be different. The seat of power of the national government, it was believed to be free of mafia tentacles.While the corruption revealed by the scandal predated Mr. Marino’s arrival in office, the mayor has been criticized as responding slowly and indecisively. “He has always been a step behind,” Mr. Bonini of La Repubblica said.Police raids have set off a torrent of bad publicity as one powerful figure after another has been taken down. They include the former president of the City Council and top municipal officials responsible for housing and social policy.It has not helped that some are former members of Mr. Marino’s own Democratic Party. In wiretaps, publicized in the national news media, calls for obedience can be heard.“These city councilmen have to be at our orders,” Salvatore Buzzi, who ran a social cooperative that provided housing services for migrants, is heard telling a mob suspect, Massimo Carminati.Both were jailed last year when the corruption revelations first emerged, and most of the public figures linked to the scandal are now under house arrest.Facing fierce criticism, Mr. Marino published a response in a national newspaper last week and then sat down for an interview last Friday in his office in Rome’s City Hall to defend himself.“I was surgically aggressive from the very beginning,” he said. “I am the first mayor that called the investigators of our I.R.S. inside our offices to check what had been done in the years before.”“We bring rules here,” he added.For the time being, though, his good intention to instill order has, it seems, ushered in still more disorder.The corruption investigation of park maintenance contractors led the mayor to suspend their work, leaving public spaces overgrown. His order to stop sidewalk vendors from peddling near historical sites prompted protests from merchants.Rome’s news media outlets have often criticized the mayor for being more interested in a foreign audience — courting wealthy patrons to restore the city’s antiquities — than in municipal troubles. As the crime scandal erupted, his popularity was already sinking as a result of problems more commonly encountered by mayors of larger cities.A recent survey published in La Repubblica found that a majority of Romans consider the mayor to be too weak, while more than 70 percent of those who supported him in the last election said they would not do so again.Once the scandal broke, critics said Mr. Marino was too naïve to grasp the vast illegal network that has long surrounded Rome’s administration, and too weak to respond.“He personally remains honest, but that’s it, as the world around him falls apart,” Ernesto Galli della Loggia, columnist for the daily Corriere della Sera, wrote in a front-page editorial last week.Mr. Marino argues that he has successfully shaken up the city’s entrenched networks, and that doing so has provoked much animosity. A few envelopes delivered in his mail contained spent bullets.“I don’t give a damn about what the political agreements were before I arrived,” he said, adding that previous mayors made decisions in closed circles, often during lunches and dinners with famed entrepreneurs.“The most important thing to me is to run the city in an honest and transparent way,” he added.Others are backing his efforts. “Marino might be an earthenware vase among iron vases,” said Alfonso Sabella, a Sicilian anti-mafia magistrate whom the mayor brought to Rome’s administration last December, after the scandal broke. “But he has proved to be persistent and honest.”He added: “I wonder where all those who are criticizing him were as the crimes were committed. He needs more time.”The mayor notched a victory last week when a report by a government delegate exonerated him of any corruption.And he maintains that he has started substituting cronyism with merit in Rome, as the rules for public bidding are streamlined and a website has been set up to allow whistle-blowers to report problems.Many residents credit Mr. Marino for his honesty but are frustrated that he is not getting more done.“Marino is a Martian in Rome, which is fascinating, but tiring,” said Marco Damilano, a political commentator and city resident.“Rome is in ruins. If he starts acting, he and the city can come out of this stronger.”