http://www.nytimes.com/1996/04/29/world/australia-gunman-kills-at-least-32.html
AUSTRALIA GUNMAN KILLS AT LEAST 32 - The New York Times
TASMANIA(AUSTRALIA),AUSTRALIA,PORT ARTHUR (AUSTRALIA),MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS,MENTAL HEALTH AND DISORDERS
April 29, 1996
2259
A gunman methodically killed at least 32 people at and near a popular tourist site on Sunday. The police captured him today when he bolted in flames from a guest cottage, which he had set afire with three hostages inside.The gunman, whom police described as a 29-year-old with a history of psychological problems, had opened fire with an semiautomatic rifle on Sunday afternoon on tourists at the ruins of a colonial prison on Tasmania.It was the worse shooting massacre in Australia in this century.The police indicated that they expected to find the bodies of three more victims inside the guest cottage, where the gunman took three hostages and held  the police at bay for 12 hours.Witnesses said the incident began at about 1:30 P.M. on Sunday, when the blond man drove up to the prison in a Volkswagen with a surfboard strapped on its top and talked casually with some of the 500 people outside."He said, 'There's a lot of WASP's around today; there's not many Japs here,  are there?' and then started muttering to himself," an unidentified survivor told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation radio.The man then walked into a cafe, pulled the rifle from a tennis bag, and methodically started shooting."He wasn't going bang-bang-bang-bang," a witness, Phillip Milburn, told the Australian radio. "It was 'bang,' and then he'd pick someone else out and line them up and shoot them."[An account by Reuters, quoting Deputy Police Commissioner Richard McCreadie  at a news conference in Hobart, the capital, gave this sequence of events: The gunman first opened fire with a high-powered rife in the crowded cafe, killing 20 people.  [He moved on among the ruins, shooting three people dead outside the cafe. He got back into his car and drove to the entrance to the ruins, where he  killed a 3-year-old girl and 6-year-old girl and their mother. He shot dead all  four occupants of a car, which he then drove to a nearby service station, killing a woman there -- his 31st victim. Mr. McCreadie did not account for the  32d victim.[The gunman also kidnapped a man and stowed him in the trunk of the stolen car, then drove to the nearby Seascape guest house, where he holed up with the hostages.]The bed-and-breakfast cottage was owned by a couple who apparently were friends of the gunman's late father. The Age newspaper of Melbourne identified them as David and Sally Martin.By early today, more than 200 local and special police units had surrounded the guest house.The police tried to negotiate by phone with the gunman, who fired two heavy-caliber military-type rifles at them and at helicopters airlifting out the dead and wounded. He demanded a helicopter for himself.When he set the cottage on fire, flames finally drove him from the building.  He threw his rifle aside."His clothing was on fire, and he started taking his clothing off," said Police Superintendent Bob Fielding.Exploding ammunition in the burning house prevented officers from rapidly searching it to learn the fate of the three hostages. "It doesn't look very good," Mr. Fielding said.The police said 25 of those killed in the shooting spree were Australians, but the dead also included two Malaysians and a victim who appeared to be Indian. Four people were not identified.One American and two Canadians were wounded along with 15 others. The police  said only that the American man, from Washington state, was not badly hurt.One Melbourne woman told the Australian Associated Press that she survived by hiding under a table at the cafe."There were people just sitting there in their chairs where they'd been eating -- dead," she said. "There was a weird sort of calm, as if no one could believe what they were seeing."Wendy Scurr, who worked at the front desk at the historic site, said the gunman had left "shooting as he went, shooting everybody he could see." She said she "ran for my life along with hundreds of other people at the site."Another witness, Karen Jones, told the Australian radio that as the gunman kept firing at fleeing tourists and at tourist buses outside the cafe, "the guy  that we were with had to go and help take a stretcher in, and the mother was saying, 'You have to get my baby to the hospital, quick, quick.' But it was already dead."The old Port Arthur prison colony is on the Tasman Peninsula, connected to Tasmania's mainland by one road on a narrow isthmus. The police closed off the road into Port Arthur, the landing site of some of the toughest convicts England sent into Australian exile in the 1800's.State gun laws vary in Australia, but it is fairly easy for a person without  a criminal record to buy a rifle or shotgun. Pistols are less commonly owned.Tasmania has one of the most lax gun laws in the nation. Until recent law changes, almost anyone could buy any kind of weapon, even a machine gun.