http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/23/arts/dance/23bejart.html
Maurice Béjart, 80, Ballet Iconoclast, Dies - The New York Times
Dancing,Bejart  Maurice,Lausanne (Switzerland),Classical Music,Deaths (Obituaries),France,Béjart Ballet Lausanne,Jamison  Judith,Ailey  Alvin  American Dance Theater,Farrell  Suzanne,Ballet of the 20th Century
Nov. 23, 2007
3939
Maurice Béjart, the French choreographer whose flamboyant and populist ballets made him the equivalent of a pop star in Europe, died yesterday  in Lausanne, Switzerland. He was 80.Emmanuel de Bourgknecht, administrator of the Béjart Ballet Lausanne, said Mr. Béjart died after having been hospitalized last week with heart and kidney problems, The Associated Press reported.Mr. Béjart’s work — especially when his Ballet of the 20th Century was based in Brussels from 1960 to 1987 — left virtually no one indifferent. He attracted both adulation from mass audiences and skepticism from critics who doubted his ability to choreograph.After creating an eclectic repertory, sometimes with avant-garde music, he moved into a counterculture phase. His “Firebird” was embodied by a Vietcong guerrilla rising up like a phoenix. In “Ninth Symphony,” Beethoven’s “Ode to Joy” was an ode to brotherhood in a sports arena, with young dancers revolving in a huge circle. The 1960s slogan “Make love, not war” became the overt theme of his “Romeo and Juliet.”At his best, and often with an erotic subtext, Mr. Béjart created dynamic, exciting versions of an earlier avant-garde. His “Rite of Spring” turned into an animalistic mating rite. In his “Bolero,” Ravel’s score accompanied the increasing sexual tension of men reaching toward a woman dancing atop a round table. Later, Mr. Béjart substituted a male soloist, still surrounded by men.At his least successful, Mr. Béjart could not offer inventive movement. When a guest star, Judith Jamison of Alvin Ailey’s troupe, appeared as the traditionally male spirit in “Le Spectre de la Rose,” the choreography was highly limited. Suzanne Farrell, who left New York City Ballet in 1969 and joined the Ballet of the 20th Century in 1970, also had little to dance in “Nijinsky, Clown of God.”Mr. Béjart’s volatile personality, complete with piercing blue-green eyes, was on display as often as his productions. In the late 1980s, when Rudolf Nureyev was artistic director of the Paris Opera Ballet, he enraged Nureyev by stepping before a curtain after one of his ballets there and announcing that he was promoting a male dancer to the highest rank although he had no authority to do so.Nonetheless, in a country like France with no modern-dance tradition, Mr. Béjart was considered a daring innovator in the 1960s and ’70s who pushed dance into the 20th century. His more spectacular works have continued to draw audiences.But critics, especially Americans familiar with a contemporary dance tradition that included Martha Graham, Merce Cunningham and the 1960s avant-garde, found Mr. Béjart’s vocabulary simplistic. At the New York debut of the Ballet of the 20th Century in 1971, his hippie-style pieces had a demagogic tinge.Audiences in the United States remained divided about his company, which made sporadic visits here. Until recently, American companies did not feature his works. This season, however, the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater will open with his “Firebird” on Wednesday.Paradoxically, Mr. Béjart was a prophet with  visible honor in his own country who could never find a home there for his company.A man of encyclopedic theatrical ideas who staged mixed-media pieces and was interested in Asian and Near Eastern philosophy, he was acclaimed by leading French stage directors like Jean Vilar, who made him the centerpiece of the Avignon Festival. In 2002 President Jacques Chirac of France singled him out as “the great Maurice Béjart” when referring to a branch of the Béjart school in Senegal.Yet for all such tributes, France’s cultural authorities and Mr. Béjart never found themselves compatible. A budding choreographer in the late 1940s, he had formed a small troupe, Les Ballets de l’Étoile, by 1953. After the success of his “Rite of Spring” in 1959, he accepted an invitation in 1960 to have his company, now the Ballet of the 20th Century, become the resident troupe of the royal opera theater, La Monnaie, in Brussels.From this base, the company embarked on worldwide tours, including Iran and Asia. After a falling out with a new management, Mr. Béjart moved his company and school, Mudra, to Switzerland in 1987, renaming them Béjart Ballet Lausanne and Rudra. The company said yesterday that its tours would continue through 2008.The name Ballet of the 20th Century was no accident. Mr. Béjart often repeated his creed that ballet and film were the major arts of the 20th century.Maurice Jean Berger was born in Marseille on Jan. 1, 1927, the son of Gaston Berger, who worked in the fertilizer business before becoming a philosophy professor and a high-ranking education ministry official. In some accounts, the maiden name of Maurice’s mother, who died when he was 7, was Béjart. It was also the surname of Molière’s wife.After studying at the Marseille Opera Ballet school and in Paris with Russian émigré teachers and with Vera Volkova in London, Mr. Béjart danced with Mona Inglesby’s International Ballet in London and the Cullberg Ballet and the Royal Swedish Ballet (1951-2). After his early freelance choreography in 1946 and his work for his own Ballets Romantiques, later Les Ballets de l’Étoile and Ballet Théâtre de Maurice Béjart, he moved to Brussels.Unlike Roland Petit, French ballet’s most important creative figure in the immediate postwar era, Mr. Béjart did not surround himself with idea men who had worked with Serge Diaghilev, including Jean Cocteau and Boris Kochno. He was his own man, aware of new trends, and he was one of the first to use musique concrète, in 1955 in “Symphonie Pour un Homme Seule.” Here, as in his adaptation of Sartre’s “No Exit,” he was concerned with themes of alienation.These were common in American modern dance, and although Mr. Béjart was seeking a new form of contemporary dance, he remained loyal to the ballet vocabulary. His dancers were sleek and neo-Classical in style. He had created a new look in dance, and Soviet stars from the Bolshoi like Maya Plisetskaya, Vladimir Vasiliev and Yekaterina Maximova found artistic freedom in appearing as guests with his company. Outside of dance, he directed and wrote theater pieces.Mr. Béjart is survived by a sister, Claudette.After his 80th birthday last January in Lausanne, Danser, the French magazine, quoted Mr. Béjart in a rare admission: “New York, that’s where I should have gone at 17, instead of being disappointed by a Napoleon III Paris where the stock exchange values reality more than dreams.”