https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/15/science/are-subpoenas-on-exxon-mobil-inquiries-valid-experts-say-yes-and-no.html
Are Subpoenas on Exxon Mobil Inquiries Valid? Experts Say Yes, and No - The New York Times
Attorneys General,First Amendment (US Constitution),Subpoenas,Exxon Mobil Corp,Smith  Lamar S,350.org,Johnson  Eddie Bernice,Rotunda  Ronald D,Schneiderman  Eric T,Healey  Maura (1971- ),Global Warming
Sept. 14, 2016
6145
A House committee heard conflicting testimony on Wednesday over exceptional subpoenas arising from investigations of Exxon Mobil by state attorneys general.Lamar S. Smith, a Republican of Texas and chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology, issued the subpoenas in July. They demanded documents and information from Eric T. Schneiderman, the attorney general of New York, and Maura T. Healey, the attorney general of Massachusetts, and also from several activist groups.The state officials are investigating how Exxon Mobil’s decades-long research on climate change squares with its funding for groups that promote doubts about climate science. The underlying accusation that the oil and gas giant had unique knowledge about climate change and sought to undercut efforts to address it are commonly referred to by the Twitter hashtag #ExxonKnew. The company vigorously denies those contentions.Mr. Schneiderman announced in November that he was seeking information from Exxon Mobil about its past statements about climate change and the current status of its research and projections. Since then, others have voiced support for his efforts, and at least two, including Ms. Healey, have issued subpoenas of their own. Exxon Mobil has provided Mr. Schneiderman with hundreds of thousands of documents.Mr. Smith has called the state-level investigations a violation of scientists’ right to free speech. Mr. Smith said he had called Wednesday’s hearing to “affirm the legitimacy” of his inquiry.The attorneys general and the organizations have refused to comply with the subpoenas from Mr. Smith, as they have refused to comply with earlier demands for documents from him, claiming that the federal subpoenas are unconstitutional. The attorneys general have cited case law going back to the proceedings of the House Un-American Activities Committee and have cited principles of states’ rights — an argument usually made by conservatives. Mr. Schneiderman and his supporters say the First Amendment argument is a smoke screen to avoid a legitimate investigation.The subpoenaed organizations, including the Union of Concerned Scientists and 350.org, have also refused to comply. This week, a group of more than a dozen First Amendment scholars and litigators sent a letter to Mr. Smith, arguing that his subpoenas, not those from the state officials, were a threat to the organizations’ First Amendment rights, and that they exceeded the legal authority of the committee.Critics of Mr. Smith, who has questioned the overwhelming scientific consensus underlying climate change, note that he has received more than $675,000 from the fossil fuel industry since 1998, including more than $24,000 from Exxon Mobil. Supporters of Mr. Smith and Exxon Mobil launched a counterattack over the weekend, noting that Mr. Schneiderman has received substantial campaign contributions from people and organizations with an interest in environmental matters.The witnesses called for the hearing included Ronald D. Rotunda, a professor at Chapman University’s law school, and Elizabeth Price Foley of Florida International University College of Law. Both are affiliated with conservative causes and organizations: Mr. Rotunda has ties to the Heartland Institute, which disputes climate science, and Ms. Foley recently wrote an article for The Wall Street Journal in support of Mr. Smith’s subpoenas.The first witness, Jonathan Turley of George Washington University law school, is not affiliated with conservative groups, and in his prepared comments he stated that he supported action against climate change. He said, however, that the committee “clearly has the ability” to expect compliance with its subpoenas. The justification for the state subpoenas, he testified, is less clear, and he expressed the opinion that they violated free speech.Charles Tiefer, a law professor at the University of Baltimore and a former acting general counsel of the House of Representatives, testified that this was the first time a House committee had subpoenaed a state attorney general, that the subpoenas were unenforceable against both the attorneys general and the groups, and that “the science committee cannot and should not try to enforce” them.Supporters of Exxon Mobil have characterized the investigation as a threat of criminal prosecution over holding increasingly unpopular scientific opinions, and thus a threat to First Amendment rights. Mr. Schneiderman has pointed out that the investigation is civil in nature, and that the crucial question is whether the company has been honest with its shareholders.“The First Amendment doesn’t protect you for fraud,” he has said.