https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/06/us/politics/bernie-sanders-hillary-clinton-gun-control.html
Bernie Sanders, a Hunting-State Senator, Treads Lightly With Guns - The New York Times
Presidential Election of 2016,Sanders  Bernard,Gun Control,Vermont,Colleges and Universities,School Shootings and Armed Attacks,Harper-Mercer  Christopher (1989-2015),Oregon,Roseburg (Ore),National Rifle Assn,Clinton  Hillary Rodham,O'Malley  Martin J,Umpqua Community College
Oct. 5, 2015
7108
After the mass shooting at a movie theater in Colorado, Senator Bernie Sanders said that gun control was a matter best left resolved in state capitals.In the aftermath of the massacre at an elementary school in Connecticut, Mr. Sanders voiced support for new gun control measures, but also noted that the rights of law-abiding gun owners “must be protected.”In fact, Mr. Sanders sounded downright skeptical of the push for tighter new laws.“If you passed the strongest gun control legislation tomorrow, I don’t think it will have a profound effect on the tragedies we have seen,” he told Seven Days, an alternative weekly in Vermont.Mr. Sanders’s statements on gun control, while less forceful than those of some other Democrats, did not seem out of place for a senator from a state where hunting is prevalent.But with last week’s mass shooting at a community college in Oregon stirring debate about America’s gun laws, Mr. Sanders’s attitudes toward gun control and the Second Amendment are facing fresh scrutiny as his presidential bid gains steam.While Mr. Sanders has outflanked Hillary Rodham Clinton by appealing to liberals, his record on gun-related issues could be a potential vulnerability in a Democratic contest in which he is not accustomed to facing doubts about his liberal credentials.Campaigning in New Hampshire on Sunday, another Democratic rival, former Gov. Martin O’Malley of Maryland, called on Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Sanders to support a series of proposals he had laid out to address gun violence.And on Monday, Mrs. Clinton detailed a gun  control plan, a mix of legislative and executive action that included an expansion of background checks. “How much longer will we just shrug?” Mrs. Clinton asked at a town hall gathering in New Hampshire.For Mrs. Clinton, the issue is an opportunity to present herself as the most proactive Democratic candidate on gun control, and provide a contrast with Mr. Sanders, who has been gaining on her in national polls.Mr. Sanders, for his part, is trying to balance representing a state where guns are mainly used for recreation against the need to appeal to a Democratic electorate increasingly agitated over mass shootings and demanding stricter gun control laws.As he focuses his message on economic inequality, Mr. Sanders has seemed less than eager to discuss the issue of gun control. At a rally on Saturday in Boston, he waited until an hour into his speech to allude to the Oregon massacre.Mr. Sanders voted against the Brady Bill in the 1990s, requiring background checks, when he was in the House of Representatives. And in 2005, he voted in favor of a bill to shield gun manufacturers and dealers from lawsuits. (Mrs. Clinton, then a senator from New York, voted against that bill, and is pledging to repeal it as part of her gun control plan.)After the Newtown, Conn., shootings, Mr. Sanders, by then a senator, voted for expanding background checks and banning assault weapons and high-capacity magazines.His positioning has not endeared him to those on either side of the issue. When he last ran for re-election in 2012, the National Rifle Association gave him a D-minus rating. This summer, a “super PAC” supporting Mr. O’Malley released an ad that concluded, “Bernie Sanders is no progressive when it comes to guns.”“I think it’s a little bit unfair to call him pro-gun,” said Bertram Johnson, the chairman of the political science department at Middlebury College in Vermont. “I think it would be fairer to say he’s more in line with what the state thinks about this.”Mr. Sanders’s campaign manager, Jeff Weaver, defended the senator’s record on Monday, saying he has supported banning assault weapons and requiring background checks since he was first elected to Congress in 1990. Mr. Weaver added that Mr. Sanders opposed the Brady Bill because of the waiting period it imposed.After the Oregon shootings, Mr. Sanders issued a statement calling for a “comprehensive approach” to deter mass killings, including “sensible gun-control legislation which prevents guns from being used by people who should not have them.”In an interview on MSNBC, he took a pragmatic approach. He said the nation needed to “get beyond the shouting” on the issue of guns and added, “I don’t know that anybody knows what the magic solution is.”“You can sit there and say, well, I think we should do this and do that,” he said. “But you got a whole lot of states in this country where people want virtually no gun control at all. And if we are going to have some success, we are going to have to start talking to each other.”In a statement on Monday, Mr. Sanders said his campaign was assembling a package of proposals to address gun violence. He expressed support for closing the so-called gun show loophole and for banning assault weapons, among other things.Mr. Sanders has also tried to draw attention to the different role of guns in his state compared with more densely populated areas, where guns are often associated with violence, not recreation. “The people of my state understand, I think, pretty clearly, that guns in Vermont are not the same thing as guns in Chicago or guns in Los Angeles,” he said in July on CNN.Vermont has a high level of gun ownership compared with other states in the Northeast. It also has some of the least restrictive gun laws in the country. At the same time, Vermont has few murders committed with firearms.“It’s a different life situation up here, and I think Senator Sanders has tried to explain that,” said Evan Hughes, a vice president of the Vermont Federation of Sportsmen’s Clubs. “His voting record has reflected the Vermont reality.”Ann Braden, the president of Gun Sense Vermont, a group that formed after the Newtown shootings and advocates new gun laws, said Mr. Sanders’s focus on keeping guns out of the wrong hands — but not attacking the mere idea of gun ownership — was “how you can actually make change.”“There are many, many responsible gun owners,” she said, “and it’s important to have someone who understands that.”