https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/08/us/oberlin-leaders-denounce-professors-remarks-as-anti-semitic.html
Oberlin Leaders Denounce Professor’s Remarks as ‘Anti-Semitic’ - The New York Times
Oberlin College,Jews and Judaism,Academic Freedom,Terrorism,Israel,Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS),Charlie Hebdo,Facebook Inc,Karega  Joy
March 7, 2016
6491
Oberlin College’s governing body has denounced as “anti-Semitic and abhorrent” social media posts by a professor that included suggestions Israeli and United States intelligence services were behind terror attacks.The board of trustees called on the private liberal arts institution in Ohio to conduct a review and report back to it for possible action in the wake of Facebook posts by Joy Karega, a professor in the rhetoric and composition department.“These grave issues must be considered expeditiously,” Clyde S. McGregor, the board chairman, said in a statement March 5 after a quarterly meeting. “In consultation with President Marvin Krislov, the board has asked the administration and faculty to challenge the assertion that there is any justification for these repugnant postings and to report back to the Board.”The board’s statement took a stronger stance than the college’s initial reaction to the posts by Dr. Karega, after The Tower, a media organization that reports on Israel and the rest of the Middle East, published on Feb. 25 screenshots of some of her postings from 2015. In them, she referred to the Islamic State group, also known as ISIS, as a “C.I.A. and Mossad organization” — a reference to the Israeli intelligence service — and suggested that Mossad had orchestrated the devastating attacks on Charlie Hebdo in Paris.A day after the Tower report was published, Oberlin said that it “respects the rights of its faculty, students, staff and alumni to express their personal views,” but that Dr. Karega’s statements did not represent the college’s views.Then, on March 4, the college published another statement, saying that its president, Mr. Krislov, had met with representatives of Jewish organizations.“In a welcoming atmosphere, we discussed, openly and candidly, the potential implications of a professor’s personal views on classroom activity and student intimidation,” the statement said. “We also discussed our shared respect for academic freedom.”Dr. Karega, who is teaching social justice writing courses this semester and does not have tenure, did not immediately reply to messages or return a telephone call seeking comment on Monday.But on March 5, the same day that the board’s statement was published, she said in a Facebook post that she would no longer speak publicly about her situation at Oberlin.“We have reached a point where it is time for me to defer to my legal counsel,” she wrote on her Facebook page. “And I gladly do so. Those of you who know me know that I have been and will continue to be firm in my convictions and resolve.”A spokesman for the college was unable to say Monday what, if any, action would be taken. The March 4 statement said the college was “required to follow established academic procedures when addressing questions regarding an individual faculty member.”Dr. Karega said on Facebook she had been receiving threats and harassment, as well as messages of support. She said she hoped people, particularly those in the Oberlin community, would continue to talk about issues of academic freedom and about what she called contested and controversial knowledge.“But I also hope that the glaring absence of my voice from such conversations compels folks to also consider and raise the hard questions about issues of labor and positioning in the academy,” she wrote.In a weekly column, Mr. Krislov said that as a Jew, the grandson of an Orthodox rabbi and as a man whose family members were murdered in the Holocaust, he was affected personally by the posts about Holocaust denial and anti-Semitic conspiracy theories.There had been calls for her to be dismissed immediately, and for the college to defend her right to freedom of expression, he wrote.“Our community will address the issues raised in this situation by honoring the essence of liberal arts education at Oberlin by interrogating assertions with facts and deep, critical thinking from multiple viewpoints,” he wrote.