http://www.nytimes.com/2007/05/03/world/africa/03sudan.html
Judges Charge 2 Top Sudanese With Atrocities in Darfur Area - The New York Times
Sudan,International Criminal Court,War Crimes  Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity,Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare
May 3, 2007
3112
PARIS, May 2 — Judges at the International Criminal Court in The Hague have issued arrest warrants for two citizens of Sudan, the first to be charged with grave atrocities in Darfur, the court said Wednesday.The judges went a step further than expected, because the prosecutor had asked for the pair only to be summoned to testify.The two men are Ahmad Muhammad Harun, a former security official who the prosecutor says played a role in planning atrocities, and Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-al-Rahman, also known as Ali Kushayb, who is accused of being a former leader of the janjaweed militia in Darfur, in the far west of Sudan. Mr. Harun is now a government minister.It is now up to Sudan to arrest the men, and their arrival at the court is far from certain. The government quickly responded that the court had no jurisdiction. Sudan’s president has repeatedly insisted that any necessary trials can be handled at home.The two men are believed to be only midlevel agents in the government’s campaign against rebels in Darfur. More than 200,000 people have died in Darfur and more than two million have been displaced, according to the United Nations.The arrest warrants are the international court’s most concrete steps linked to Darfur, and they follow a 20-month investigation. In issuing the warrants, the judges said there were reasonable grounds to conclude that the two suspects were “criminally responsible” for torture, mass rape and the forced displacement of entire villages in western Darfur in 2003 and 2004.Even if the warrants are not carried out, they may have some effect, lawyers said. For one thing, they are likely to complicate the two men’s travel outside Sudan.Mr. Harun, though charged with planning a murderous campaign, recently appeared at a human rights conference in Egypt in his new capacity as Sudan’s minister for humanitarian affairs. He also oversees Darfur’s large refugee camps, where international aid agencies have complained that he is hindering their access to the needy.Mr. Kushayb, who the Khartoum government said was under arrest pending its own investigations, has been seen traveling under police protection in the Darfur region, The Associated Press reported.Several steps are now open to the court. It can ask the United Nations Security Council, which asked the court in 2005 to investigate crimes in Darfur, to order Sudan to make the arrests. The Council can resort to other measures, including sanctions.But similar orders that the Council has issued to Serbia have not led to the detention of  Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic, both Bosnian Serbs charged with genocide by a United Nations criminal court.The International Criminal Court, which is independent of the United Nations but is accepted by 104 countries, has a broad mandate to investigate and try those most responsible for war crimes or crimes against humanity. But it has no police or military personnel to enforce its summonses or arrest warrants.