http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/20/us/minneapolis-protest-police-jamar-clark.html
Police and Protesters Clash in Minneapolis Over Fatal Shooting of Black Man - The New York Times
Police Brutality  Misconduct and Shootings,Demonstrations  Protests and Riots,Blacks,Clark  Jamar (d 2015),Minneapolis (Minn)
Nov. 19, 2015
7418
The fatal shooting of an unarmed black man by a Minneapolis officer led to a tense standoff between the police and protesters Wednesday night.The police used chemical irritants after they said protesters had thrown bricks and bottles, as clashes over the shooting death of Jamar Clark intensified.Mr. Clark, 24, was shot in the head early Sunday and died at a hospital the next day. Protests started within hours as some neighbors said that Mr. Clark had been handcuffed when he was shot, which contradicted statements by the Minneapolis police.Demonstrators pitched tents outside a police station near the shooting scene, and on Monday night dozens were arrested after marching onto an Interstate and blocking traffic.Tensions escalated Wednesday afternoon when officers moved in to clear the protesters’ campsite at the police station, infuriating activists who had pledged to stay until specific demands had been met, including the release of video evidence. The police maneuver set off hours of confrontation between officers and demonstrators, documented by both sides on Twitter, that grew more tense as a cold, rainy day turned into night. Mayor Betsy Hodges of Minneapolis issued a statement calling on “officers to exercise maximum restraint” and asking “protesters to act peacefully.”“I understand that emotions are running high in the community and across the city,” Ms. Hodges’s statement said. “I share many of the emotions that people are feeling in Minneapolis today.”On Twitter, the Minneapolis police acknowledged shooting a “marking round” at a man who they said had been throwing bricks. The police then accused members of the crowd of using mace against officers, prompting rebukes from protesters who said it was actually the police who had been spraying the chemical. Later, the police said officers and protesters had both sprayed a “chemical irritant.”Wednesday’s unrest came after officials met two of the protesters’ demands by starting a federal civil rights investigation into the shooting and by releasing the names of the two officers involved. The officers, Mark Ringgenberg and Dustin Schwarze, are both seven-year veterans of law enforcement but are relatively new to the Minneapolis force, with each having worked there for 13 months.Minneapolis is the latest American city to experience protests over the death of a black person at the hands of police. Since Michael Brown, an unarmed black 18-year-old, was fatally shot in August 2014 by an officer in Ferguson, Mo., large demonstrations have taken place over violent episodes in several cities, including Baltimore, Cleveland and New York.As in some other cases, Minneapolis protesters have sought video evidence to resolve discrepancies between the accounts of the police and of witnesses. The police said Mr. Clark was a suspect in an assault and that he had interfered with paramedics attempting to treat his victim. When officers arrived, the police said, he fought with them, leading to the gunfire. Some who said they witnessed the incident disputed that account, saying on social media or to local reporters that Mr. Clark was handcuffed when he was shot.Drew Evans, the superintendent of the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension, which is conducting the state investigation, has said the officers involved were not wearing body cameras and that there was no dashboard camera video from police cruisers. Mr. Evans said that cellphone video, surveillance footage from nearby buildings and a camera in an ambulance had all captured portions of the encounter, but not all of it. Mr. Evans said releasing that footage immediately, as protesters have requested, could compromise the investigation.At a news conference on Wednesday morning, Javille Burns, a sister of Mr. Clark’s, said her brother was well regarded by people in his neighborhood and that he “did not deserve” to die.“We don’t want revenge,” Ms. Burns said. “We do want justice.”