https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/26/world/europe/with-no-unified-refugee-strategy-europeans-fall-back-on-old-alliances.html
With No Unified Refugee Strategy, Europeans Fall Back on Old Alliances - The New York Times
Middle East and Africa Migrant Crisis,European Union,Tusk  Donald,Greece,Merkel  Angela,Tsipras  Alexis,Syria,International Relations,Austria
Feb. 25, 2016
1659
ROME — Roughly five weeks ago, Donald Tusk, one of the European Union’s most powerful political figures, issued a blunt warning to its 28 countries: Come up with a coherent plan to tackle the refugee crisis within two months, or risk chaos.Surprisingly, given the plodding pace of European Union policy making, many of Europe’s national leaders are now moving swiftly, announcing tough new border policies and guidelines on asylum — even with three weeks remaining on the deadline set by Mr. Tusk, president of the European Council.The problem is that the leaders are not always adhering to European rules, possibly not sticking to international law and not acting with the unity envisioned by Mr. Tusk. In some cases, they instead seem to be reverting to historical alliances rather than maintaining the European Union’s mantra of solidarity.This week, Austria joined with many of the Balkan countries to approve a tough border policy in what some are wryly calling the return of the Hapsburg Empire. Four former Soviet satellites, led by Poland and Hungary, have become another opposition power bloc.All the while, a call for unity by Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany is increasingly being ignored, even as she struggles to tamp down on a political revolt at home while searching for a formula to reduce the number of refugees still trying to reach Germany.“We are now entering a situation in which everybody is trying to stop the refugees before they reach their borders,” said Ivan Krastev, chairman of the Center for Liberal Strategies, a research institute in Sofia, Bulgaria.Mr. Krastev added, “The basic question is, which country turns into a parking lot for refugees?”For many months, European Union officials, joined by Ms. Merkel, have tried to share the burden by distributing quotas of the refugees already in Greece and Italy to different member states. Many states have balked, and the program is largely paralyzed.European Union leaders also agreed to pay 3 billion euros, roughly $3.3 billion, to aid organizations in Turkey to help stanch the flow of migrants departing the Turkish coast for the Greek islands. But record numbers of migrants keep coming.Without an effective Europe-wide policy response, and facing growing public anger in many countries, Europe’s national leaders have splintered, searching for allies.Only months ago, Austria, like Germany, symbolized Europe’s welcoming embrace to Syrians and other refugees fleeing war and poverty. Now, Austria is defying European Union officials — and frustrating Ms. Merkel — by placing a cap on refugees.Austria also convened a meeting on Wednesday in Vienna with many of the Balkan states that last year had allowed migrants to cross their borders while traveling north toward Germany and Sweden.The group in Vienna agreed to tighten limits on the number of migrants allowed to travel north, and pledged to help Macedonia clamp down on its southern border with Greece.Poland and Hungary are also providing help to Macedonia. Earlier, police chiefs in Austria, Croatia, Macedonia, Serbia and Slovenia established tighter rules for screening migrants.Taken together, these moves threaten to turn Greece into the so-called refugee parking lot. Already, the Greek police have had to relocate several thousand migrants from the border checkpoint with Macedonia to refugee centers on the outskirts of Athens.The Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, is incensed and Greece on Thursday recalled its ambassador to Austria. Greece’s Foreign Ministry issued a statement warning against the re-emergence of Europe’s ancient rivalries.“It is clear that the major problems of the European Union cannot be confronted via thoughts, attitudes and extra-institutional initiatives that have their roots in the 19th century,” the statement said.Greece is now the primary entry point for Syrians and other refugees trying to reach Europe. Already this year, more than 100,000 migrants have landed on Greek islands, the International Organization for Migration has reported, a number that could ultimately top one million or more. Greek officials warn that the country — still reeling from the economic crisis — could be thrown into civil conflict if it becomes a dumping ground for migrants trying to reach the rest of Europe.“This is not a Greek problem,” said Megan E. Greene, chief economist for Manulife Asset Management and a longtime analyst of Europe.“It is a European problem, and it needs a European solution. We are seeing ‘solidarity’ go out the window.”Analysts say that if the deal struck this week in Austria becomes integrated into a broader European Union policy, with Macedonia effectively becoming the bloc’s outer edge, it would redraw the external borders of the group. Greece would be left outside the bloc’s de facto borders, despite being a European Union member. Yet Macedonia and Serbia, neither of which are members, would be inside.The European Union will hold a pivotal March 7 meeting with Turkey to discuss the flow of refugees. European leaders will then gather in Brussels on March 17-18 for a summit meeting intended to achieve a unified migration policy — the session that represents Mr. Tusk’s deadline.Leaders like Ms. Merkel have long argued that migration demands a Europe-wide solution and is too big for any single country to adequately address. Yet it will not be easy.Hungary is now planning to hold a public referendum on whether to accept or reject refugees. Italy — which has been dealing with migration for years — is calling for the creation of so-called Eurobonds to finance the response to the migration crisis — even as Germany and other countries remain wary.In Germany, the political pressure on Ms. Merkel is only growing, and some predict that the anti-immigrant Alternative für Deutschland party could make serious inroads in three important upcoming state elections.Moreover, Ms. Merkel’s own re-election campaign next year could be in doubt. She has criticized Austria and the other countries for acting outside European Union parameters, and for potentially isolating Greece. Yet a policy to tighten borders and stem the refugee flow could likely help her politically.“For Germany, it is vital to bring the numbers down,” said Almut Möller, head of the Berlin office of the European Council on Foreign Relations.