http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/22/business/worldbusiness/22cnd-volkswagen.html
Sentence in Volkswagen Scandal - The New York Times
Volkswagen AG,Frauds and Swindling,Sentences (Criminal)
Feb. 22, 2008
2144
FRANKFURT — Volkswagen’s long-running corruption scandal has blackened its name and tainted some of Germany’s most influential businessmen. On Friday, a court handed down the first jail time in the affair, sentencing Volkswagen’s former top labor leader to nearly three years in prison.The court found the chief employee representative, Klaus Volkert, guilty of inciting fraud against the carmaker after he was paid nearly $4 million in what the court said were improper bonuses.Another Volkswagen official, Klaus-Joachim Gebauer, was given a one-year suspended sentence for his role in arranging lavish company trips for employee representatives, some of which included visits to prostitutes and company-paid shopping sprees for spouses.The trial has jolted Germany, and not just because of the tawdry nature of the allegations. It is one of a series of scandals — most recently an investigation of widespread tax-evasion in Liechtenstein — that are raising questions about a lack of ethics in German corporate circles.“We’re in a painful transition from the old corporate Germany toward one with a new face,” said Gerd Weisskirchen, a senior legislator for the Social Democratic Party, which governs in a coalition with the Christian Democrats. “There is a lot of stumbling in this phase.”In the case of Volkswagen, the payoffs were authorized by the company’s head of personnel, Peter Hartz, who was also an adviser to the former chancellor, Gerhard Schröder. Mr. Hartz helped draw up a landmark package of steps to overhaul the German economy, known as the Hartz reforms.Last year, Mr. Hartz admitted that he funneled money to Mr. Volkert and other employee representatives to buy their support for management policies on Volkswagen’s supervisory board, on which they held seats. He was given a two-year suspended prison sentence and a heavy fine.Though the sentences imposed on Friday were lighter than prosecutors had requested, legal experts expressed satisfaction that Mr. Volkert would go to prison, saying it showed resolve by the state to get tough with offenders.Last week, prosecutors raided the home of Klaus Zumwinkel, the former head of the German postal service, on suspicion that he had evaded $1.47 million in taxes by stashing assets in the Alpine principality of Liechtenstein. They led him to a car under a hail of camera flashbulbs.“They want to show they’re determined to cut immoral behavior,” said Ferdinand Dudenhöffer, the director of the Center for Automotive Research in Gelsenkirchen, who follows Volkswagen. But, he added, “I fear that we’re working on the symptoms and not the underlying problem.”The German government, Mr. Dudenhöffer noted, recently drafted a new version of the so-called Volkswagen Law, which seeks to preserve some of the provisions that grant employees, and their representatives, unusual influence at Volkswagen, Germany’s largest carmaker.A European court struck down the original Volkswagen Law last October, saying that it impeded the free flow of capital in Europe by making Volkswagen impregnable to a hostile takeover.“That atmosphere made it possible for Klaus Volkert to do what he did,” Mr. Dudenhöffer said. “We kicked out the guy, but we haven’t change the atmosphere in which he operated.”The trial of Mr. Volkert and Mr. Gebauer, in the northern city of Braunschweig, turned a harsh light on how Volkswagen used cash and perquisites to keep its employee representatives mollified.Mr. Gebauer paid for pleasure trips overseas, during which visit to prostitutes by Volkswagen representatives were common, as were gift certificates at expensive boutiques for wives. Mr. Volkert admitted arranging a lucrative contract for a former girl-friend.“He knew he had no right to the payments,” the chief judge, Gerstin Dreyer, said in sentencing Mr. Volkert to 2 years and 9 months. “Volkert did not let up, and kept coming back for more.”Mr. Volkert denied asking Volkswagen for the bonus; his lawyer suggested he was likely to appeal the ruling.“This is a crude case of class justice,” the lawyer, Johann Schwenn, said to reporters outside the court. Mr. Schwenn noted that more senior executives received suspended sentences.Volkswagen’s chairman, Ferdinand K. Piëch, and its former chief executive, Bernd Pischetsrieder, had been called to testify after allegations that Mr. Piëch was aware of the payments; both denied it.Volkswagen declined to comment on the ruling. The carmaker preferred to focus on its January sales figures, which rose 11.1 percent compared with the same month last year. In the United States, where it has struggled for years, sales declined 8.8 percent in January, to 21,000 vehicles.But analysts said Volkswagen still had work to do in unraveling the clubby ties that gave rise to this scandal.“Volkswagen was created by a very close alignment of capital and unions,” Mr. Weisskirchen of the Social Democrats said. “Now, in a global economy, they’ve got to realign those ties.”