https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/11/books/review/toure-on-so-much-things-to-say-oral-history-bob-marley-roger-steffens.html
Bob Marley Comes Alive in This Collection of Interviews With the People Who Knew Him Best - The New York Times
Books and Literature,Steffens  Roger (1942- ),So Much Things to Say: The Oral History of Bob Marley (Book)
July 11, 2017
7445
SO MUCH THINGS TO SAYThe Oral History of Bob MarleyBy Roger SteffensPhotographs by the author434 pp. W. W. Norton & Company. $29.95.Most singers are products. They’re cogs in the gears of the music industrial complex, singing so the manufacturer can have things to press, the label can have records to sell, the radio can have songs to play, the promoters can have tickets to move, and the kids can have stuff to stream. So most singers are molded by record companies the same way food companies calibrate the amount of salt in a frozen dinner. But every once in a while a special artist comes along. Someone who appears to speak for the people. It’s in his music, his life story, his worldview and the way he carries himself — he seems like an extension of the people and their leader. His music does not come across as a commercial gesture because it’s as if he’s on the public stage to speak for his constituents and give voice to their feelings and their needs. He seems like a sort of Cultural Senator, a man who represents his people — who vote for him with their dollars and their love. No music star in the Western world has ever been a more powerful Cultural Senator on the global stage than Nesta Robert Marley.As the New York Times pop music critic Jon Pareles once wrote: “Bob Marley became the voice of third-world pain and resistance, the sufferer in the concrete jungle who would not be denied forever. Outsiders everywhere heard Marley as their own champion.” When fans see you as their champion, you become an important part of their lives.Marley introduced reggae and Rastafarianism to much of the globe, making him a crucial ambassador for those subcultures, and he is the face of Jamaica, by far its most famous son. If he is a Cultural Senator, then that’s part of his delivering for his constituents — he spread an image of Jamaica around the world, and now everyone has a soft spot in his or her heart for that magical island. But at the same time Marley’s politics were revolutionary.In “War” Marley declares war on racism, and you get the sense that he does not mean war in a purely symbolic way. In “Redemption Song” he challenges us to respond to the assassinations of Martin Luther King and Malcolm X — “How long shall they kill our prophets, while we stand aside and look?” In “Them Belly Full (but We Hungry)” he criticizes the class system in Jamaica. In “Zimbabwe” he calls for liberating Africa’s nations. In “Burnin’ and Lootin’” he refers to violent resistance. Marley was speaking for the downtrodden and urging oppressed people throughout the African diaspora to revolt by any means necessary.You can tell a lot about an artist by what song he does last at his shows. In Marley’s later years, his most popular period, he usually closed with “Get Up, Stand Up,” a call to action, to arms, to revolution. He sent concertgoers home with the sound of him urging “stand up for your rights” ringing in their ears. Marley was that rarity — a black revolutionary who didn’t scare white people.A rich new oral biography called “So Much Things to Say,” by the reggae scholar Roger Steffens, narrates the life of Marley from cradle to grave through interviews Steffens has collected over the years from Marley, his mother, his wife, his last girlfriend, several of his children, his musical partners Bunny Wailer and Peter Tosh, and many more. Steffens has been on the Marley case for decades, and he’s a crucial voice in this epic chorus.Many in this group paint Marley as a Christlike figure: a boy born with nothing who becomes a deeply spiritual person, a natural leader and, they say, a prophet who can see the future. Steffens reports that when Marley was at his height, “his live shows began to resemble gospel gatherings with a preacher and his (all-female) choir.” But long before that, when he was just 3 years old, they say he showed psychic powers, reading palms with shocking accuracy. Still, young Marley was neglected. “He was like the ugly duckling,” Bunny Wailer remembers. “There were many nights of cold ground for his bed and rock stone for his pillow.” He was also a social outcast. “Whites thought of him as a black child; blacks, critical of mixed-race children, taunted him as ‘the little yellow boy,’” Steffens says. “For Bob, his color seemed to be an impediment wherever he turned, causing him to turn inward, a solitary soul relying on his own inner strengths.” His early strengths, however, did not include the musical. “Bob never really was a person who had any kind of excellent voice per se,” according to Segree Wesley, a childhood friend of Marley’s and a singer. “In my opinion Bob had the worst voice of all.”Yet Marley became a star through years of painstaking work, and when he got money he was exceedingly generous, a one-man welfare department. “There were people who would be on a regular thing,” says his former business manager Colin Leslie. “They come every month, in the understanding they were getting the money. … I had to make sure there was a float of funds to make sure that people would be fed. There were those who depended on hot meals from Bob.” Some say Marley supported 4,000 people, but Leslie thinks it was more.The book digresses at times into trivia for the superfans — we learn that Marley’s favorite meal was Irish moss, a form of seaweed — but there’s a lot that’s illuminating. One of Marley’s many girlfriends, Esther Anderson, says the root of “I Shot the Sheriff” lay in their relationship: “It’s about birth control. Bob was always after me to ‘breed’ and have a baby with him. He kept asking me why after I’d been with him for a month already I hadn’t got pregnant yet. I told him I was on the pill and this led to the line ‘Every time I plant a seed he said kill it before it grow’ — you see, the sheriff is the doctor.” Marley wrote the song while sitting alongside his friend Lee Jaffe, who says Marley began with the line “I shot the sheriff,” to which Jaffe added, “But you didn’t get the deputy.” Together, Jaffe says, the lines signified the impossibility of defeating the system, because even if you kill the lawman, there’s another one right behind him. For Jaffe, the message is: “This is going to be a long tragic struggle that’s going to need a lot of everyday heroes.”In his final days Marley battled cancer that had spread from his toe and invaded his entire body. Danny Sims, one of his producers, recalls a doctor saying, “Bob Marley has more cancer in him than I’ve seen with a live human being.” He continued to fight, traveling to hospitals around the globe while surrounded by family, leading to a scene in which Rita, his wife of decades, serves breakfast in bed to Marley and his girlfriend Cindy Breakspeare. At least it was a mutually open situation: Steffens tells us, “Rita Marley has said that throughout their touring years she was more like Bob’s mother, taking care of him while having love affairs of her own.”Marley died in 1981 at the age of 36, a number that his older friends found significant because he had predicted it. Ibis Pitts, a friend who met Marley in Delaware long before his career took off, says, “Nesta told us about him not being on this earth many more years than Jesus Christ was.” One of Pitts’s friends “remembered the details”: “Nesta said he was going to be leaving at 36.” He may have correctly foreseen the age of his death, but he did not leave us. More than three decades after his death, Marley is still with us because there are still millions of people voting for him with their dollars and their hearts.