https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/14/podcasts/the-daily/timeline-trump-russia-june-7-2016.html
‘The Daily’: The Events of June 7, 2016 - The New York Times
The Daily,Russian Interference in 2016 US Elections and Ties to Trump Associates,Trump  Donald J Jr,Extraterrestrial Life,Vakoch  Douglas
July 14, 2017
3570
Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via StitcherIn the early evening of June 7, 2016, Donald Trump Jr. sent an email to confirm a meeting with a Russian lawyer who was said to have incriminating information about Hillary Clinton.Three hours later, his father said in speech that he would deliver a major address detailing Mrs. Clinton’s “corrupt dealings” to give “favorable treatment” to foreign governments, including “the Russians.”Conspiracy or coincidence?On today’s episode:• Peter Baker, our chief White House correspondent, unpacks the timeline of the events in June 2016.• A group of international scientists is devising a plan to send messages into space, to see if we’re alone. But what if we’re not? We talk with Douglas Vakoch, the leader of a group of scientists and amateur space enthusiasts planning to begin sending the messages in 2018, and to Steven Johnson, who wrote about this for The New York Times Magazine.Background reading:• More from the timeline of events in June 2016.• “Greetings, E.T. (Please Don’t Murder Us.)”Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb.If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.On your iPhone or iPad:Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “The Daily.”)Once you’re on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)On your Android phone or tablet:You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’re reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)From a desktop or laptop:Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”On Google Home:You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times news” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”